A REVIEW OF THE CULTURAL HERITAGE LINKED OPEN DATA ONTOLOGIES 
AND MODELS 
 
F. Liu, J. Hindmarch, M. Hess 
 
University of Bamberg, Digital Technologies in Heritage Conservation, Institute of Archaeology, Heritage Conservation Studies 
and Art History, Germany – (fangchao.liu, john.hindmarch, mona.hess)@uni-bamberg.de  
 
 
 
KEY WORDS: Ontologies, CIDOC CRM, Europeana, Sampo Model, Linked Open Data. 
 
 
ABSTRACT: 
 
In recent years, there has been a trend towards synergies among cultural heritage institutions, such as GLAM (Galleries, Libraries, 
Archives & Museums) collaborations in the field of information resource management. These institutions have been actively promoting 
the construction of digital humanities projects. Such projects primarily target data resource construction and digital humanities services, 
which are in line with the service functions of GLAM institutions. With the development of networking and digitisation, museums 
have been making more prominent contributions to knowledge sharing and dissemination. 
Digital technology has brought about profound changes in the academic research environment. The expansion of traditional research 
and the emergence of new questions in the digital environment have promoted novel perspectives, thinking, and methods. With the 
increase in digitisation of cultural heritage, the scale of data has grown rapidly, and the types of data available have been continuously 
enriched, from knowledge aggregation to knowledge organization and even knowledge transmission. Therefore, it is necessary to 
examine the tools of digital humanities, which constitute an important means of knowledge production, and to work with traditional 
GLAM institutions to promote digital thinking and interdisciplinary knowledge integration methods. At the technical level, methods 
such as knowledge graphs and ontologies are used to construct a multi-layered and systematic knowledge system. This paper presents 
a review focused on three cultural heritage models, CIDOC CRM, Europeana and the Sampo Model, and reflects on three aspects of 
the current models: technical framework construction, digital resources, and service systems. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 General Introduction 
Cultural and GLAM institutions use many different metadata 
schemes, and thus to efficiently organise and manage metadata 
of different standards, uniform data rules need to be established. 
Although digitising cultural heritage can increase access and 
usability for people with widely differing needs, as the volume of 
data increases, so does the need for an effective data model.  
This review focuses on three cultural heritage models, CIDOC 
CRM, Europeana and the Sampo Model. We compare the current 
situation of the models in three aspects: technical framework 
construction, digital resources, and service systems. All the 
models selected in this review focus on long-term storage and 
providing persistent access to large digital resources. 
  
1.2 CIDOC CRM 
The CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model (CIDOC CRM) is an 
ISO standard ontology (ISO 21127:2014) used to enable the 
exchange of information and meaningful interoperability 
between GLAM and other cultural institutions (Čerāns et al., 
2021). It was developed by the International Committee for 
Documentation (CIDOC) under the International Council of 
Museums (ICOM). It assists researchers, managers and the public 
in related fields in cultural heritage information by providing a 
common and extensible semantic framework (Fig 1). It is a 
formal ontology that provides a framework for describing 
cultural heritage objects and their relationships to each other in a 
structured and consistent way. It is designed to be a conceptual 
tool that can be used to represent and manage the complex 
relationships between different types of objects in cultural 
heritage collections. 
  
Figure 1. CIDOC CRM family of Models  
1.3 Europeana 
In order to enable European stakeholders to better understand 
their own historical treasures and cultural heritage, in 2005, 19 
countries, led by France, began creating a digital library, which 
first opened in 2008. Originally the "European Digital Library", 
as more and more museums, galleries and other institutions 
joined, it was renamed Europeana (Latin, meaning "things 
European") (Purday, 2009a). Currently, Europeana includes data 
resources from around 4,000 cultural institutions. Europeana 
designed the Europeana Semantic Element metadata scheme 
(ESE) based on its own data characteristics. With the 
development of Linked Data, Europeana created the open 
Europeana Data Model (EDM) with reference to relevant 
standards and specifications such as METS (Metadata Encoding 
and Transmission Standard) and RDF (Resource Description 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLVIII-M-2-2023 
29th CIPA Symposium “Documenting, Understanding, Preserving Cultural Heritage: 
Humanities and Digital Technologies for Shaping the Future”, 25–30 June 2023, Florence, Italy
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLVIII-M-2-2023-943-2023 | © Author(s) 2023. CC BY 4.0 License.
943


 
Framework). In terms of metadata semantic enrichment, the 
EDM provides a data model basis for semantic association and 
description between different institutions. Europeana focuses on 
long-term storage and persistent access to massive digital 
resources and is committed to the global sharing of digital 
resources within the scope of copyright licenses. 
 
1.4 Sampo Model 
Sampo model is a meta-model for creating cross-domain 
ontology and linked data integration. The Sampo model creates 
semantic portals using principles of re-usability (Hyvönen, 2022) 
and can link and make interoperable different types of resources 
(Fig 2). The Sampo model includes three main parts: a model for 
creating and publishing linked data; a resource content view for 
end users; and a faceted retrieval and data analysis based on web 
portals. In addition to providing services such as text retrieval, 
browsing and downloading of traditional resources, it also 
provides a variety of content views to help users perform multi-
dimensional semantic retrieval and analysis. Based on the Sampo 
model, several thematic semantic portals have been developed, 
such 
as 
WarSampo, 
CultureSampo, 
AcademySampo, 
FindSampo, etc. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Sampo Model based on a shared ontology (Hyvönen, 
2012) 
 
1.5 Summary of the introduction 
With the massive increase in the availability of digital resources, 
integration and exploration options have become a public need. 
In order to address this demand, countries have developed and 
established digital resource discovery platforms to realise the 
shared application and value-added development of digital 
resources. To facilitate reuse and ontology layering, the ontology 
engineering community has suggested various levels of 
abstraction, differentiating four distinct degrees of abstraction in 
ontology design, as indicated in Fig 3 (Haller & Polleres, 2020). 
 
 
Figure 3. Levels of Abstraction in Ontology Design  
With the help of the network of digital systems, the digitised data 
stored in heritage institutions can be shared not only within the 
specialist community itself, but also enables the involvement of 
the public (Arera-Rütenik, 2021). While serving the public, all 
three models in this review are committed to providing access to 
digital resources only within the scope of copyright licenses. 
Different platforms can gather abundant digital resources from 
cultural heritage institutions and provide bundled access, 
comprehensively enhancing the level of digital services provided 
to the public. 
 
 
2. CIDOC CRM 
CIDOC CRM stands for "Conceptual Reference Model" 
developed by a committee of ICOM, CIDOC (see section 1.2). It 
is based on the idea of an "object-oriented" model, where each 
object in the collection is treated as an individual entity, with its 
own unique set of properties and relationships to other objects. 
Widely used in the field of cultural heritage documentation and 
management, CIDOC CRM provides a standard vocabulary and 
framework that can be used to describe and exchange information 
about cultural heritage objects, regardless of the specific system 
or software used to manage the collection.  
 
To quantify the academic publishing rate on CIDOC CRM as a 
tool we use CiteSpace  to visualise the knowledge graph of 
publications (Chen, 2004 & 2006). Following are some basic 
analyses of publications on CIDOC CRM. The database used is 
the Web of Science Core Collection, and the search topic 
TS=(CIDOC CRM). 
 
Figure 4.  Publications on CIDOC CRM (Created at 
20.03.2023) 
 
The line chart shows the annual publications, and the bar chart 
the total publications. It can be seen that the first article was 
published in 1999, with the first peak in 2010 with 11 papers, and 
the highest number of publications in 2015, with 18 articles. The 
past several years (excluding 2020) have been relatively stable, 
with around 15 articles per annum. This indicates that the CIDOC 
CRM model is well established and still an object of active 
research. The Keywords Cluster analysis of CIDOC CRM from 
Citespace is shown in Fig 5 and the Timeline in Fig 6. The 
analysis results have six clusters; CIDOC CRM, semantic web, 
digital humanities, historic building, knowledge base & data 
standards. As can be seen in Fig 6, digital humanities and data 
standards appeared first, but data standards lasted only a short 
time and did not continue after 2017. Similarly, knowledge base 
also disappeared around 2019. Historic building appeared latest 
in 2018, while the other topics have been continuous throughout 
the period. This suggests that "data standards" and "knowledge 
base" are no longer the focus of research, or perhaps have been 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLVIII-M-2-2023 
29th CIPA Symposium “Documenting, Understanding, Preserving Cultural Heritage: 
Humanities and Digital Technologies for Shaping the Future”, 25–30 June 2023, Florence, Italy
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLVIII-M-2-2023-943-2023 | © Author(s) 2023. CC BY 4.0 License.
944


 
merged into other clusters. On the other hand, CIDOC-based 
"historic buildings" have been a research hotspot in recent years. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Cluster Map (Created at 20.03.2023) 
 
 
Figure 6. Timeline of Cluster (Created at 20.03.2023) 
 
2.1  Technical Framework Construction 
CIDOC CRM is divided into two main parts: the "core" model, 
which defines the basic concepts and relationships used to 
describe cultural heritage objects, and a set of "extensions" that 
provide additional concepts and relationships specific to different 
types of cultural heritage collections, such as archaeological, 
ethnographic, or museum collections. 
 
The main function of the CIDOC CRM is to provide a framework 
for the mediation of cultural heritage information and, in doing 
so, to act as the semantic "glue" that unites various localised 
sources of information into a valuable and cohesive global 
resource (Tzitzikas et al., 2022). CIDOC CRM is based on a 
formal ontology and the technical framework of CIDOC CRM 
includes the following elements: Classes, Properties and 
Relationships, Formal Language and Extension. 
 
CIDOC CRM defines a set of classes that are used to represent 
different types of entities in the cultural heritage domain. These 
classes provide a formal structure for organizing and describing 
cultural heritage data, such as "E21 Person" for people, and "E71 
Human-Made Thing" for objects that have been created by 
humans (Mazurek et al., 2012). Subclasses further refine the 
classification. These classes provide a formal structure for 
organising and describing cultural heritage data. Fig 7 shows the 
CIDOC CRM Top level classes. Alongside Classes, Properties 
are used to represent integrated information in a rich semantic 
network for CIDOC CRM compliant datasets (Tzitzikas et al., 
2022). Properties describe the various characteristics of cultural 
heritage objects, for example "P1 is identified by", "P2 has type", 
and "P46 is composed of". Version 7.1.2 of the CRM includes 81 
Classes and 160 Properties (Classes & Properties Declarations 
of CIDOC-CRM Version: 7.1.2, 2023).  
 
 
Figure 7.  The CRM Top Level (Oldman, 2014) 
 
Relationships are used to describe the connections between 
cultural heritage Classes and Properties. It is provided by CIDOC 
CRM as a formal language and structure for representing cultural 
heritage data, including objects, events, actors, and places. The 
current formal language of CIDOC CRM is Web Ontology 
Language (OWL), a standard for representing ontologies on the 
web. CIDOC CRM is also related to other ontologies, like Dublin 
Core, FOAF, and SKOS. These define concepts and relationships 
that are complementary to CIDOC CRM and can be used to 
extend its capabilities.  
 
The community has contributed "extensions" to the ontology for, 
for example, the description of conservation activities, paintings 
and other specific cases. It can be extended programmatically, 
creating new Classes and Properties on top of the core model to 
provide a domain that is more suited to a particular knowledge 
organisation (Niccolucci, 2017). For example, the extension 
"CRMgeo" is focused on the spatiotemporal properties of 
temporal entities and persistent items, enabling information 
integration on a spatiotemporal level based on the semantics 
defined in CIDOC CRM (Hiebel et al., 2017). 
 
2.2 Digital Resources 
The digital resources of CIDOC CRM include a variety of 
materials that support the use and implementation of the 
conceptual reference model. These resources are designed to help 
users understand and apply the model in different contexts and to 
promote interoperability and standardisation in the management 
of cultural heritage collections.  
 
The CIDOC CRM ontology formally represents the model in a 
machine-readable format. The ontology defines the classes, 
properties and relationships of the model, and allows for the 
exchange of information between different systems and 
applications. The ontology is available in RDF, OWL, and XML 
etc., and is used by software applications and services to 
represent, query, and reason about cultural heritage data. A 
variety of applications for CIDOC CRM have been developed 
(Use Cases | CIDOC CRM, 2023). There is also a user guide, a 
technical specification, and a set of guidelines for implementing 
the model. The documents provide detailed information about the 
concepts, properties, and relationships defined in the model and 
instructions for using the model in different applications. 
 
2.3 Service System 
The service system of CIDOC CRM refers to the set of services, 
applications, and tools built on top of the conceptual reference 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLVIII-M-2-2023 
29th CIPA Symposium “Documenting, Understanding, Preserving Cultural Heritage: 
Humanities and Digital Technologies for Shaping the Future”, 25–30 June 2023, Florence, Italy
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLVIII-M-2-2023-943-2023 | © Author(s) 2023. CC BY 4.0 License.
945


 
model to provide specific functionality and support for cultural 
heritage management. These services and applications are 
designed to work with CIDOC CRM as a foundation and to 
provide value-added functionality for different use cases and 
contexts.  
 
Many collection management systems for GLAM institutions use 
CIDOC CRM as the underlying data model for managing and 
describing cultural heritage objects. Tools for cataloguing, 
indexing, retrieval, and analysis allow users to work with data 
compliant with the CIDOC CRM ontology. It has also been 
adopted as an exchange standard for sharing cultural heritage 
data across different systems and organizations. These standards 
include the CIDOC CRM XML schema, which provides a 
common format for exchanging CIDOC CRM data, and the 
Linked Open Data (LOD) standard, which allows CIDOC CRM 
data to be integrated with other cultural heritage data sources on 
the web. These applications use the CIDOC CRM ontology as a 
foundation for describing cultural heritage objects and allow 
users to discover and explore relationships between different 
objects and resources. The service system of CIDOC CRM 
enables users to apply the model in a wide range of contexts and 
use cases by providing a common foundation for different 
services and applications. 
 
CIDOC CRM involves a range of activities and processes aimed 
at developing, maintaining, and promoting the conceptual 
reference model. These activities are coordinated by ICOM, 
which oversees the development of the model and provides 
guidance and support to the community of users and developers.  
 
 
3. EUROPEANA 
Europeana is a digital platform that aggregates and makes 
accessible cultural heritage content from across Europe. It was 
launched as an initiative of the European Commission with the 
goal of providing a single access point to the wealth of digital 
cultural heritage resources held by European libraries, archives, 
museums, and other cultural institutions. Europeana aggregates 
information from digital collections and thus provides access to 
digital objects including books, manuscripts, photographs, 
paintings, films, and audio recordings, which, in the past, was 
difficult or in some cases impossible (Purday, 2009b). The 
platform is designed to make cultural heritage more accessible, 
usable, and reusable for researchers, educators, and the general 
public. Europeana also supports the development of digital skills 
and competencies in the cultural heritage sector and works to 
promote the use of digital technologies in cultural heritage 
preservation and dissemination. 
 
Following are some basic analyses of Europeana from Citespace. 
The database is the Web of Science Core Collection, and the 
search topic TS=(Europeana). 
 
In Fig 8, the line shows the annual publications, while the bars 
show total publications. The first article on the topic ‘Europeana’ 
was published in 2009, and there followed an upward trend, 
peaking in 2014 with 25 articles. Subsequently the volume was 
relatively stable, before showing a sharp decline from 2021 
onwards. The period from 2013 to 2020 was the most popular 
period for studying Europeana. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Publications of Europeana (Created at 20.03.2023) 
 
 
Figure 9.  Cluster Map (Created at 20.03.2023) 
 
 
Figure 10.  Timeline of Cluster (Created at 20.03.2023) 
Fig 9 and Fig 10 illustrate keywords clustering and their timeline. 
Seven clustering results are shown, namely cultural heritage, 
digital libraries, linked open data, linked data, smart cities, 
metadata standards and machine learning. Digital libraries and 
smart cities were the first to appear, both stopping around 2020. 
Machine learning and Linked Open Data appeared in 2012 and 
are the longest-lasting clusters, still prevalent today. On the other 
hand, metadata standards were the latest to appear and earliest to 
end, with a very short research window. 
 
3.1 Technical Framework Construction 
The technical framework construction of Europeana is based on 
a distributed system architecture that allows for the aggregation 
and interoperability of digital cultural heritage content from 
multiple institutions across Europe. Europeana collects metadata 
from cultural heritage institutions through a process known as 
metadata contribution.  The collections need to make a conscious 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLVIII-M-2-2023 
29th CIPA Symposium “Documenting, Understanding, Preserving Cultural Heritage: 
Humanities and Digital Technologies for Shaping the Future”, 25–30 June 2023, Florence, Italy
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLVIII-M-2-2023-943-2023 | © Author(s) 2023. CC BY 4.0 License.
946


 
decision to make data available and program an export dataset 
compatible with the EDM. This process involves mapping the 
metadata to common data elements. The normalised metadata is 
then indexed and made available through Europeana's search and 
discovery interface, which allows users to find and retrieve 
digital objects based on specific criteria, such as keywords, date 
ranges, and media type. 
 
At the beginning, the Europeana Semantic Elements (ESE) was 
used for Europeana, but it soon became clear that it would need 
to be replaced. From 2009, work began on the Europeana 
Semantic Data Layer, a task of the Europeana Connect project. 
As a result of the process of specifying an EDM (Bontchev, 
2012), EDM was considered a candidate for operationalisation. 
EDM adheres to the Web of Data principles and is serialisable in 
a variety of XML and RDF syntaxes (i.e., N-Triples, Turtle, 
JSON-LD, etc.) (Freire et al., 2018). This flexibility allows and 
encourages technological innovation.  
Europeana manages data through a centralised database system, 
which ensures the preservation and accessibility of the digitised 
cultural heritage content over time. The database is designed to 
support the efficient retrieval and delivery of digital objects to 
users. Europeana also promotes the use of Linked Open Data, 
which allows for the linking and reuse of cultural heritage data 
across the web. This enhances the discoverability and 
accessibility of cultural heritage content and supports the 
development of new applications and services based on the data.  
 
3.2 Digital Resources 
Europeana offers a wide variety of digital resources. It provides 
access to digitised books, manuscripts, and other written works 
from libraries and archives across Europe, including valuable 
insights into Europe's cultural heritage. Also, Europeana gives 
access to a wide range of images, including photographs, 
paintings, drawings, and other forms of visual material. These 
resources form a visual representation and a unique perspective 
on European history and art. Moreover, audio and video 
resources, including recordings of music, sound archives, and 
film as well as digitised museum objects, including artifacts, 
sculptures, and other objects of material culture, are also 
available through Europeana. When it launched in November 
2008, Europeana gave users access to 4.5 million digital objects, 
and this total is increasing every year. As of early 2023, it 
provides access to over 55 million digital objects (Brief History, 
2023). Europeana does not contain the actual digital objects, 
which are hosted by the owning institution, instead, it contains 
pointers to the objects in the form of metadata records (MR). 
MRs are used for most of the services that Europeana provides, 
such as searching and browsing (Berardi et al., 2012).  
 
Europeana provides access to a wealth of digital cultural heritage 
resources from across Europe and is designed to support the 
preservation, dissemination, and use of this valuable cultural 
heritage for generations to come. Moreover, Europeana is 
intended to promote Europe’s digital economy, for example, 
holding online exhibitions and participating in crowd-sourcing 
experiments (Nicholas & Clark, 2013).  
 
3.3 Service System 
Target Users: Europeana’s target users are segmented into five 
categories: general users with an interest in culture or history, 
school students and academic users, both using the resources in 
(albeit widely differing) educational contexts, expert users 
interested in specific topics, and professional users, probably 
employed by CH and GLAM institutions (Purday, 2009b). 
Search and Discovery: Users search and retrieve digital cultural 
heritage resources based on specific criteria, such as keywords, 
date ranges, and media type. The search results can be filtered 
and refined, making it easy for users to find the needed resources. 
Europeana’s search architecture is based on Apache Solr, a 
widely-implemented open-source search platform (Petras et al., 
2017). Most search requests (ca. 70%) are for named entities, in 
particular geographic searches and people or Cultural Heritage 
objects. Although English is the most popular language on the 
site, people also use their native tongue (Petras et al., 2017).  
Europeana Website Homepage: In the middle of the web 
interface is a search bar. In addition, there is a "Collections" menu 
at the top right, which leads to seven options: Theme, Topics, 
Features, Centuries, Galleries, Organisations and Recent items. 
Below each collection are some specific examples, such as 
Colouring Books under Features (Fig 12). Moreover, in the 
"Stories" (Fig 11) option, there are specially curated selections 
from Europeana’s collections. There are currently more than 900 
items available (Stories, 2023). The "For professionals" is a link 
to the "Europeana Pro" website with descriptions.  
 
 
Figure 11.  Europeana Stories (Stories, 2023) 
 
 
Figure 12.  Colouring Books (Colouring Books, 2023) 
Alongside basic searching and browsing, another aspect of 
Europeana’s functionality is Data Reuse: the affordance of 
reusable cultural heritage through the provision of open and 
machine-readable data, which can be used by researchers, 
educators, and developers to build new applications and services. 
Europeana also provides tools and services that support the 
development of new applications, including APIs and software 
development kits (Charles & Isaac, 2015). In addition, Europeana 
supports education and outreach activities by providing resources 
and tools for both educators and students, including lesson plans, 
educational videos, and online games. Europeana also provides 
outreach materials, such as brochures and posters, to help 
promote the platform and its resources. Furthermore, Europeana 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLVIII-M-2-2023 
29th CIPA Symposium “Documenting, Understanding, Preserving Cultural Heritage: 
Humanities and Digital Technologies for Shaping the Future”, 25–30 June 2023, Florence, Italy
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLVIII-M-2-2023-943-2023 | © Author(s) 2023. CC BY 4.0 License.
947


 
provides technical support to its users, including support for data 
ingestion and normalisation, as well as technical support for data 
retrieval and display. As mentioned above, Europeana also 
provides support for the development of novel applications and 
services which use its data. At the same time, evaluations have 
aided the development of Europeana, though specific 
implementations cannot be linked to specific evaluation findings 
(Petras & Stiller, 2017).  
 
 
4. SAMPO MODEL 
 
The Sampo Model is a concept developed by the Semantic 
Computing Research Group (SeCo) from Aalto University and 
University of Helsinki in Finland (Semantic Computing Research 
Group (SeCo), 2023).  "Sampo" refers to a magical artifact in 
Finnish mythology that brings wealth and good fortune.  
 
Following are some basic analyses of Sampo from Citespace, 
with the search topic TS=(Sampo Model). The total publications 
(Fig 13) are much smaller than those for Europeana or CIDOC 
CRM, with a total of 16 articles up to 2022, with some years 
showing no publications at all. Because of the very limited 
amount of data, it is impossible to perform cluster analysis.  
 
 
Figure 13.  Publications of Sampo Model                       
(Created at 20.03.2023) 
 
 
Figure 14.  Country of Publications (Created at 20.03.2023) 
Fig 14 shows a Country Analysis Map of publications. The 
largest source of articles (six) is Finland, followed by the USA 
with four. The graph also shows collaborations between Finland, 
USA, France, and England, while the other countries shown have 
published articles independently.  
 
The Sampo Model refers to the policies, regulations, and norms 
that shape the cultural environment in Finland. This includes 
factors such as the Finnish education system, emphasising the 
importance of collaboration and networking within the Finnish 
cultural and academic world. Several portals have been 
developed based on the Sampo Model. The following analysis 
uses one such portal, WarSampo (WarSampo, 2023), as an 
example.  
 
4.1  Technical Framework Construction 
WarSampo is a digital humanities project that aims to provide a 
comprehensive understanding of the impact of World War II on 
Finland and Finnish society. It has been online since 2015 with 
several new application perspectives published in 2016–2019. 
The WarSampo application won the LODLAM Open Data Prize 
in Venice in 2017 (Hyvönen, 2022). The project uses various 
sources such as war diaries, official documents, photographs, 
maps, and other archival materials to create a rich, interactive 
database of the war years.  
 
The WarSampo project was initiated by the University of 
Helsinki in 2017 and has since grown into a collaborative effort 
involving several Finnish institutions, including the Finnish 
National Archives, the Finnish Defence Forces, and the Finnish 
Broadcasting Company. WarSampo consists of two parts: First, 
a Linked Open Data service called WarSampo Data enables 
Digital Humanities study and application development on the 
history of the war. Second, a semantic WarSampo Portal has been 
developed to evaluate and demonstrate the data service's 
usefulness. WarSampo is one of the first large-scale systems for 
serving and publishing WW2 LOD on the Semantic Web 
(Hyvönen et al., 2016). 
 
WarSampo is built on a combination of tools and technologies 
based on the principles of Linked Open Data, a common 
framework for publishing and connecting data on the web. The 
LOD approach enables data integration and interoperability 
between different datasets, which is essential for creating a 
comprehensive database of the war years. WarSampo uses 
ontologies to create a formalised and standardised representation 
of the domain knowledge. The project is based on a range of tools 
and techniques for extracting data from various sources, 
including digitised archives, official documents, and war diaries. 
The various visualisation tools help users explore and understand 
the data in the database, including maps and timelines. 
 
4.2 Digital Resources 
The WarSampo database includes information on various aspects 
of the war, such as military operations, civilian experiences, 
propaganda, and post-war reconstruction efforts, with a core 
dataset of the casualty register of the National Archives of 
Finland (Koho and Hyvönen, 2022). The project also 
incorporates advanced data visualization and text-mining 
techniques to help users better understand the complex socio-
political dynamics of war. The Finnish Winter War (1939–1940) 
against the Soviets, the Continuation War (1941–1944), in which 
the Finns briefly retook the captured Winter War lands, and the 
Lapland War (1944–1955), in which the Finns drove the 
Germans from Lapland, are all covered by the WarSampo Data 
Service. The datasets that were used are shown in Fig 15 
(Hyvönen et al., 2016). 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLVIII-M-2-2023 
29th CIPA Symposium “Documenting, Understanding, Preserving Cultural Heritage: 
Humanities and Digital Technologies for Shaping the Future”, 25–30 June 2023, Florence, Italy
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLVIII-M-2-2023-943-2023 | © Author(s) 2023. CC BY 4.0 License.
948


 
 
Figure 15.  Datasets of WarSampo (Hyvönen et al., 2016) 
 
 
Figure 16.  Homepage of WarSampo 
 
Fig 16 shows the homepage of WarSampo and nine interlinked 
application perspectives for accessing the underlying data: Major 
events (1050), People (100000), Army Units (15900), Places (an 
alternative view for events), Kansa Taisteli magazine articles 
(3360), Casualty data (95000 death records), Authentic 
photographs (160000), War Cemeteries (630) and Finnish 
Prisoners of War (4500) (Hyvönen, 2022).  The data is presented 
in a multitude of formats. For example, events are depicted on a 
timeline, on maps, and with connected data; people are linked 
with biographies and further information. Events, war diaries, 
and persons connected to Army formations are also included, and 
both contemporary and historic places provide a geographic 
perspective for looking up events in the battle zones. Articles 
from the Kansa Taisteli magazine include soldiers’ recollections 
and there are photographs from the front lines and the War 
Cemetery of the World War II Dead (Hyvönen, 2022). 
 
4.3 Service System 
The Sampo Model is based on six principles: 1. Support 
collaborative data creation and publishing. 2. Use a shared open 
ontology infrastructure. 3. Support data analysis and knowledge 
discovery in addition to data exploration. 4. Provide multiple 
perspectives to the same data. 5. Standardise portal usage by a 
simple filter-analyse two-step cycle. 6. Make clear distinction 
between the Linked Open Data service and the user interface.  
 
The Linked Data Finland platform provides Sampo portal data 
services and since 2019 the Sampo-UI framework has been used 
for user interfaces (Hyvönen, 2022). Based on this, the SeCo 
team has already developed over 30 sub-projects. The Sampo 
Model is extensible and can be used for visualisation of any field 
with a dataset. One of the innovations of the Sampo model and 
portals is to offer the user tools to analyse and visualise more 
detailed information than is possible with basic searching and 
browsing (Hyvönen, 2020). Given the scale and complexity of 
the knowledge graph, it would be expensive and time-consuming 
to edit the data for each individual set of user requirements; 
instead, WarSampo allows multiple application viewpoints to be 
supported merely by changing how the data is accessible via 
SPARQL. This makes adding new application viewpoints to the 
data simpler and more independent without impacting the 
existing perspectives (Hyvönen et al., 2016).  
 
5. CONCLUSION 
In the digital age, different users have widely differing needs, and 
in the cultural heritage field, different LOD models have been 
developed to meet these needs. This review focusses on CIDOC 
CRM, Europeana and Sampo Model as examples, though future 
work will include further examples such as World Digital 
Library, HathiTrust, Linked Art Model, CrossCult project etc., as 
well as applications and systems such as the LOD-based 
vocabulary at Bamberg University (Vokabular Dienst: BVHA: 
Alphabetical Index:, 2023).  
 
The analysis of publications, shows that, although Europeana 
appeared more recently than CIDOC CRM, it has been studied 
more frequently, though research on both peaked around the 
same time in the early 2010s. (In contrast, the Sampo model is 
more localised, with the majority of its 16 publications coming 
from Finland). Overall, this indicates that digital model research 
reached its peak almost a decade ago.  
 
While it should be noted that not everyone is positive about 
digital models, with some researchers and conservators holding 
the opinion that the effort required to set them up and operate 
them outweighs their benefits (Arera-Rütenik, 2021), we believe 
that each of the models examined in this paper  has its own unique 
strengths. CIDOC CRM is a model that provides a common and 
formal language for describing cultural heritage objects and their 
relationships. As a framework for organising and structuring 
cultural heritage data, its ability to represent complex 
relationships and hierarchies among cultural heritage objects in 
particularly strong. 
 
Europeana is a digital platform that provides access to millions 
of digitised cultural heritage resources from European GLAM 
and cultural institutions, giving users a single access point to 
explore and discover Europe's cultural heritage. Its strength lies 
in its vast and diverse collection of objects, which span multiple 
disciplines and domains. Europeana also provides powerful 
search and discovery tools, enabling users to easily explore and 
discover cultural heritage resources.  
 
The Sampo Model is a digital infrastructure for managing and 
presenting cultural heritage data in Finland. It consists of modular 
tools and services that can be customised and combined to create 
tailored digital heritage applications. The Sampo Model is 
powerful in its flexibility and modularity, allowing the creation 
of bespoke digital heritage applications that meet specific needs 
in multiple domains, including eCulture, eHealth, eLearning, 
eGovernment, 
eCommerce, 
eGeography, 
and 
eBiology. 
Currently the Sampo Model is only in use in Finland but the 
concepts could easily be adapted for use elsewhere.  
 
REFERENCES 
Arera-Rütenik, T. (2018). Digital Humanities in der 
Bauforschung: Systematik und Potenzial kodierter Bau- und 
Befundbeschreibungen 
als 
Wissensgewinnungs 
und 
Wissensdistributionswerkzeug. In S. Breitling & J. Giese 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLVIII-M-2-2023 
29th CIPA Symposium “Documenting, Understanding, Preserving Cultural Heritage: 
Humanities and Digital Technologies for Shaping the Future”, 25–30 June 2023, Florence, Italy
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLVIII-M-2-2023-943-2023 | © Author(s) 2023. CC BY 4.0 License.
949


 
(Eds.), Bauforschung in der Denkmalpflege: Qualitätsstandards 
und Wissensdistribution. University of Bamberg Press. 
 
Berardi, G., Esuli, A., Gordea, S., Marcheggiani, D., & 
Sebastiani, F. (2012). Metadata Enrichment Services for the 
Europeana Digital Library. In P. Zaphiris, G. Buchanan, E. 
Rasmussen, & F. Loizides (Eds.), Theory and Practice of Digital 
Libraries (Vol. 7489, pp. 508–511). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33290-6_61 
 
Bontchev, B. (2012). Evolving Europeana ’s Metadata: From 
ESE to EDM. Digital Presentation and Preservation of Cultural 
and 
Scientific 
Heritage, 
2, 
27–37. 
https://doi.org/10.55630/dipp.2012.2.12 
 
Brief History. (2023). Europeana Pro. 
 https://pro.europeana.eu/about-us/mission 
 
Čerāns, K., Ovčiņņikova, J., Bojārs, U., Grasmanis, M., Lāce, L., 
& Romāne, A. (2021). Schema-Backed Visual Queries over 
Europeana and Other Linked Data Resources. In R. Verborgh, A. 
Dimou, A. Hogan, C. d’Amato, I. Tiddi, A. Bröring, S. Mayer, F. 
Ongenae, R. Tommasini, & M. Alam (Eds.), The Semantic Web: 
ESWC 2021 Satellite Events (Vol. 12739, pp. 82–87). Springer 
International 
Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
80418-3_15 
 
Charles, V., & Isaac, A. (2015). Enhancing the Europeana Data 
Model (EDM). 
 
Chen, C. (2004). Searching for intellectual turning points: 
Progressive knowledge domain visualization. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 101(suppl_1), 5303–5310. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0307513100 
 
Chen, C. (2006). CiteSpace II: Detecting and visualizing 
emerging trends and transient patterns in scientific literature. 
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and 
Technology, 57(3), 359–377. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.20317 
 
Classes & Properties Declarations of CIDOC-CRM version: 
7.1.2. (2023).  
https://www.cidoc-crm.org/html/cidoc_crm_v7.1.2.html 
 
Colouring Books. (2023). 
 https://www.europeana.eu/en/colouring-books 
 
Freire, N., Charles, V., & Isaac, A. (2018). Evaluation of 
Schema.org for Aggregation of Cultural Heritage Metadata. In A. 
Gangemi, R. Navigli, M.-E. Vidal, P. Hitzler, R. Troncy, L. 
Hollink, A. Tordai, & M. Alam (Eds.), The Semantic Web (Vol. 
10843, pp. 225–239). Springer International Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-93417-4_15 
 
Haller, A., & Polleres, A. (2020). Are we better off with just one 
ontology on the Web? Semantic Web, 11(1), 87–99. 
https://doi.org/10.3233/SW-190379 
 
Hiebel, G., Doerr, M., & Eide, Ø. (2017). CRMgeo: A 
spatiotemporal extension of CIDOC-CRM. International 
Journal 
on 
Digital 
Libraries, 
18(4), 
271–279. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00799-016-0192-4 
 
Hyvönen, E. (2020). Using the Semantic Web in digital 
humanities: Shift from data publishing to data-analysis and 
serendipitous knowledge discovery. Semantic Web, 11(1), 187–
193. https://doi.org/10.3233/SW-190386 
Hyvönen, E. (2022). Digital humanities on the Semantic Web: 
Sampo model and portal series. Semantic Web, 1–16. 
https://doi.org/10.3233/SW-223034 
 
Hyvönen, E., Heino, E., Leskinen, P., Ikkala, E., Koho, M., 
Tamper, M., Tuominen, J., & Mäkelä, E. (2016). WarSampo 
Data Service and Semantic Portal for Publishing Linked Open 
Data About the Second World War History. In H. Sack, E. 
Blomqvist, M. d’Aquin, C. Ghidini, S. P. Ponzetto, & C. Lange 
(Eds.), The Semantic Web. Latest Advances and New Domains 
(Vol. 9678, pp. 758–773). Springer International Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-34129-3_46 
 
Koho, M., & Hyvönen, E. (2022). Studying Occupations and 
Social Measures of Perished Soldiers in WarSampo Linked Open 
Data. 
 
Mazurek, C., Sielski, K., Walkowska, J., & Werla, M. (2012). 
Applicability of CIDOC CRM in Digital Libraries. 
 
Niccolucci, F. (2017). Extending, mapping, and focusing the 
CIDOC CRM: Introduction to the special issue. International 
Journal 
on 
Digital 
Libraries, 
18(4), 
251–252. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00799-016-0198-y 
 
Nicholas, D., & Clark, D. (2013). The second digital transition: 
To the mobile space – an analysis of Europeana. Learned 
Publishing, 26(4), 240–252. https://doi.org/10.1087/20130402 
 
Oldman, D. (2014). The CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model 
(CIDOC-CRM): PRIMER. 
 
Petras, V., Hill, T., Stiller, J., & Gäde, M. (2017). Europeana – a 
Search Engine for Digitised Cultural Heritage Material. 
Datenbank-Spektrum, 17(1), 41–46. 
 https://doi.org/10.1007/s13222-016-0238-1 
 
Petras, V., & Stiller, J. (2017). A Decade of Evaluating 
Europeana—Constructs, Contexts, Methods & Criteria. In J. 
Kamps, G. Tsakonas, Y. Manolopoulos, L. Iliadis, & I. Karydis 
(Eds.), Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries 
(Vol. 10450, pp. 233–245). Springer International Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67008-9_19 
 
Purday, J. (2009a). Think culture: Europeana.eu from concept to 
construction. BIBLIOTHEK Forschung Und Praxis, 33(2). 
https://doi.org/10.1515/bfup.2009.018 
 
Purday, J. (2009b). Think culture: Europeana.eu from concept to 
construction. 
The 
Electronic 
Library, 
27(6), 
919–937. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/02640470911004039 
Semantic 
Computing 
Research 
Group 
(SeCo). 
(2023). 
https://seco.cs.aalto.fi/ 
 
Stories. (2023). https://www.europeana.eu/en/stories 
Tzitzikas, Y., Mountantonakis, M., Fafalios, P., & Marketakis, 
Y. (2022). CIDOC-CRM and Machine Learning: A Survey and 
Future Research. Heritage, 5(3), 1612–1636. 
 https://doi.org/10.3390/heritage5030084 
 
Use Cases | CIDOC CRM. (2023). https://www.cidoc-
crm.org/useCasesPage 
 
Vokabular 
Dienst: 
BVHA: Alphabetical 
index: 
(2023). 
https://hist-arch-vocab.org/skosmos/bvha/en/index 
 
WarSampo. (2023). https://www.sotasampo.fi/en/ 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLVIII-M-2-2023 
29th CIPA Symposium “Documenting, Understanding, Preserving Cultural Heritage: 
Humanities and Digital Technologies for Shaping the Future”, 25–30 June 2023, Florence, Italy
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLVIII-M-2-2023-943-2023 | © Author(s) 2023. CC BY 4.0 License.
950
