Citation: Münster, S.; Maiwald, F.;
di Lenardo, I.; Henriksson, J.; Isaac, A.;
Graf, M.M.; Beck, C.; Oomen, J.
Artificial Intelligence for Digital
Heritage Innovation: Setting up a
R&D Agenda for Europe. Heritage
2024, 7, 794–816. https://doi.org/
10.3390/heritage7020038
Academic Editors: Bruno Fanini and
Nicola Masini
Received: 2 December 2023
Revised: 16 January 2024
Accepted: 31 January 2024
Published: 6 February 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
heritage
Review
Artificial Intelligence for Digital Heritage Innovation: Setting up
a R&D Agenda for Europe
Sander Münster 1,*
, Ferdinand Maiwald 2
, Isabella di Lenardo 3, Juha Henriksson 4
, Antoine Isaac 5
,
Manuela Milica Graf 1,6, Clemens Beck 1
and Johan Oomen 7
1
Junior Professorship for Digital Humanities (Object/Image), Friedrich Schiller University Jena,
07737 Jena, Germany; manuela.graf@timemachine.eu (M.M.G.); clemens.beck@uni-jena.de (C.B.)
2
Institute of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany;
ferdinand.maiwald@tu-dresden.de
3
Digital Humanities Institute, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL-DHI),
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; isabella.dilenardo@epfl.ch
4
Musical Archive Finland, Sörnäisten rantatie 25, 00500 Helsinki, Finland; juha@musiikkiarkisto.fi
5
Europeana Foundation, 2595 BE The Hague, The Netherlands; antoine.isaac@europeana.eu
6
Time Machine Organisation, 1100 Vienna, Austria
7
Netherlands Institute for Sound & Vision, 2514 BE The Hague, The Netherlands; joomen@beeldengeluid.nl
*
Correspondence: sander.muenster@uni-jena.de
Abstract: Artificial intelligence (AI) is a game changer in many fields, including cultural heritage. It
supports the planning and preservation of heritage sites and cities, enables the creation of virtual
experiences to enrich cultural tourism and engagement, supports research, and increases access and
understanding of heritage objects. Despite some impressive examples, the full potential of AI for
economic, social, and cultural change is not yet fully visible. Against this background, this article
aims to (a) highlight the scope of AI in the field of cultural heritage and innovation, (b) highlight the
state of the art of AI technologies for cultural heritage, (c) highlight challenges and opportunities,
and (d) outline an agenda for AI, cultural heritage, and innovation.
Keywords: cultural heritage; AI; agenda; overview
1. Introduction
Digitization is key for protecting, preserving, documenting and opening up Euro-
pean and global cultural heritage (CH) to meet pressing sustainability threats, including
environmental ones and increasing social inclusivity. Within the CH sector, economic
activities related to digital collections in cultural institutions are a market worth ten bn EUR
in 2015 [1]. These developments have been accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic [2].
Digital technologies can transform the entire value chain model in CH institutions—from
capturing and digitizing tangible and intangible heritage and long-term preservation over
innovative digital research methods to digital channels allowing people across the globe
to interact with digital objects. These channels enable connections to other collections
published on the web and accelerate the creation of new artistic works, unearthing new
narratives in collections. While all these areas of work could be improved by applying the
latest digital technologies, a significant increase is expected during the next few years.
The Strategic Topic Group (STG) Cultural Heritage in Green and Digital Transitions
for Inclusive Societies was formed in 2022 within the European Institute of Innovation
and Technology’s (EIT) Knowledge and Innovation Community for Culture & Creativity
and seeks to unlock the potential of CH for the green and digital transitioning of Europe
encompassing societal challenges on this key policy topic. The group includes 32 partner
organizations in mid-2023 and focuses on four closely connected areas, including (i) up-
skilling and capacity building; (ii) environmental impact of operations of CH institutions;
(iii) increasing outreach and community engagement; and (iv) creation of new business
Heritage 2024, 7, 794–816. https://doi.org/10.3390/heritage7020038
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/heritage


Heritage 2024, 7
795
models. This article investigates the state of the art and proposes future steps to leverage
artificial intelligence (AI), particularly machine learning (ML), for CH innovation. The
purposes of this article are:
•
To highlight the scope of ML in CH and innovation;
•
To present the state of the art of ML technologies for CH;
•
To identify challenges, risks, and opportunities;
•
To draft a mitigation strategy and agenda for AI in CH and innovation.
This article summarizes and reviews published research papers and expert opinions.
It addresses the stakeholders such as authorities, innovators, and researchers dealing with
cultural heritage and AI.
1.1. Methodology
Input for this article came from (a) a desk review of recent project reports, research
articles and agendas at the EU level, (b) domain experts to provide community and media
type-specific input, and (c) an online workshop to collect feedback, in particular, regarding
the proposed roadmap.
The desk research included the review of deliverables from recent EU projects on
digital heritage (see, e.g., [3]); document collections and working papers compiled by,
e.g., the Council of Europe [4], the JPI [5]; and the review of AI-related roadmap documents
from the EC and AI-related associations. The review was conducted as a thematic inquiry
(approach [6,7] and application [8]) as a topic-oriented qualitative research paradigm. The
8 domain experts involved as authors compiled media type-specific overview sections
and reviewed the overall sections based on desk research. The online workshop took
place in December 2023 and involved 26 individuals from member associations of the
STG. Feedback on the draft roadmap was provided through verbal comments, Zoom chat
contributions and an online survey conducted via the EC Survey tool. This feedback was
reviewed and incorporated into the revision of the roadmap.
1.2. Definitions
Cultural heritage can be understood as traces and expressions from the past that
attribute values and are used in contemporary society, cf. [9]. CH has traditionally focused
on tangible objects, though its complete understanding also implies the inclusion of intan-
gible, natural, and—most recently—born-digital heritage, such as computer games and
websites [10].
While CH traditionally focuses on tangible objects, a broader understanding adds
intangible heritage (e.g., dances, customs, and crafts) and natural heritage (Figure 1).
Another important concept is digital (cultural) heritage. It comprises technologies to
preserve, research, and communicate CH [11], which includes materials like texts and
images created digitally or digitized, as well as digital resources of human knowledge or
expression (e.g., cultural, educational, or scientific) [10]. This latter facet also comprises
various digital technologies to study CH [12].
Innovation: In CH, digital innovation plays a key role in adding economic value [13,14].
Innovation is the “multi-stage process whereby organizations transform ideas into
new/improved products, services or processes, to advance, compete and differentiate
themselves successfully in their marketplace” ([15] p. 95). This complex endeavor occurs in
multi-stakeholder environments defined as innovation ecosystems [16]. Policies play a key
role in steering innovation (e.g., for the EU level [17,18]) and vice versa, being influenced
by innovations (e.g., research results and new products) as well as global trends (climate
change, health, digitization, diversity, and intangible heritage).
ML and AI: ML, AI, and big data are interconnected fields that have gained significant
attention in recent years [19]. In today’s era of rapid technological advancement and
exponential increases in extremely large datasets (“big data”), AI has transitioned to
tangible applications on a large scale [20].


Heritage 2024, 7
796
 
 
 
 
Tangible Cultural  
Heritage—e.g., monuments 
Intangible Cultural 
Heritage—e.g., rites 
Natural Cultural  
Heritage—e.g., mountains 
Digital Cultural Heritage—
e.g., computer games 
Figure 1.
Types of cultural heritage [20] (Images: Münster except for the right-hand image:
https://www.europeana.eu/de/item/916118/S_TEK_object_TEKS0057154, accessed on 1 February
2023).
•
Artificial intelligence (AI) refers to the development of computer systems capable of
performing tasks that would typically require human intelligence, such as pattern
and speech recognition, game playing and decision-making, problem-solving, and
learning from data (cf. [21,22]). AI encompasses subfields, including ML, natural
language processing, computer vision, and robotics. AI is now being used across all
disciplines, including information science, mathematics, medical science, geoscience,
physics, and chemistry [23].
•
Machine learning (ML) is a subset of AI that focuses on developing algorithms and
models that enable computers to learn from experience without being explicitly pro-
grammed. ML algorithms learn patterns and relationships from large datasets and use
this knowledge to make predictions, classify data, or make decisions (cf. [24]). ML is
traditionally divided into three categories: supervised, unsupervised, and reinforce-
ment learning [25]. An algorithm learns from labeled training data to make predictions
or decisions in supervised learning. The goal is to learn a mapping function to ac-
curately predict the correct output label for new, unseen input data. Unsupervised
learning aims to find structure and regularity in an unlabeled dataset. In reinforcement
learning, the algorithm learns a policy for maximizing rewards given as feedback
within a dynamic environment [26,27]. While originally algorithmic approaches were
used for solving ML problems, the advent of deep learning and neural networks
almost completely replaced these traditional methods [28].
•
Big data refers to large and complex datasets that cannot be effectively processed
or analysed using traditional data processing techniques (cf. [29,30]). In contrast to
other approaches, big data processes full-scale data instead of samples to uncover
patterns, trends, and insights. Big data often involves using advanced technologies
and techniques, such as distributed computing and data mining.
2. Application Fields of AI in CH
In CH, AI is being used in a variety of research areas. These include:
•
Image analysis and restoration: AI algorithms can analyze and restore old, damaged,
or degraded (moving) images, sounds, paintings, and photographs. These algorithms
can enhance image quality, remove noise, and even reconstruct missing parts of
the artwork, aiding in preserving and restoring cultural artifacts. Examples listed
in [27] are the prediction of the painting’s style, genre, and artist, the detection of
fake artworks by stroke analysis, and the artistic style transfer using adversarial
networks to regularize the generation of stylized images.” Further research deals with
the automatic colorization of images [31] and the restoration of ancient mosaics [32].


Heritage 2024, 7
797
•
Object recognition and classification: AI-powered computer vision techniques enable
automatic recognition and classification of cultural objects. By analyzing visual fea-
tures and patterns, AI algorithms can identify and categorize artifacts, sculptures, and
architectural elements [33], facilitating the organization and cataloging of museum
collections. Examples are the prediction of color metadata, e.g., for textile objects [34],
of technique, timespan, material, and place metadata for European silk fabrics [35],
and the recognition and classification of symbols in ancient papyri [36].
•
Translation and transcription: AI language models are capable of translating. e.g.,
ancient texts, inscriptions, and manuscripts into modern languages. They can also be
used for modern languages by translating metadata or full-text content of heritage
objects and related information, making sharing cultural heritage across languages
easier. Other models can transcribe handwritten texts, allowing researchers and
historians to access and understand historical documents and perform automated
analysis (e.g., [37]).
•
Automatic text analysis: This comprises various approaches [38]. An example is
the automatic semantic indexing of pre-structured historical texts, which enables
historians to mine large amounts of text and data to gain a deeper understanding of
the sources (e.g., [39]); for example, tax lists or registers of letters sent to a historical
entity [40].
•
Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR): AI technology supports the
creation of immersive VR and AR experiences for CH sites and museums. Visitors
can virtually explore ancient ruins, historical sites, or museum exhibitions, interacting
with AI-generated virtual characters or objects to enhance their understanding and
engagement with the cultural context [41,42].
•
Recommender systems for personalized experiences: AI algorithms can analyze user
preferences, historical data, and contextual information to provide personalized recom-
mendations for CH experiences. Despite the risks of information filtering (e.g., [43]),
use is to suggest relevant exhibits, customized tours, or tailored content, AI-powered
recommender systems enhance visitor engagement and satisfaction, or—triggered by
the advent of large language models (LLMs) such as GPT—dialogue and chatbot sys-
tems. Examples are the use of chatbots in museums [44,45] or recommender systems
for CH collections (e.g., [46,47]).
•
Cultural content analysis and interpretation: AI techniques, such as natural language
processing (NLP), are used to analyze large volumes of cultural content, including
literature, music, and artwork. This analysis can reveal patterns, themes, and cultural
influences, providing valuable insights into historical contexts and artistic movements.
Examples are metadata enrichment (e.g., [48–50]) and linking to open data sources
(e.g., [33]).
•
Heritage digitization and preservation: AI can be crucial in digitizing cultural arti-
facts and archives. By automating digitization processes and extracting knowledge, AI
speeds up the preservation of CH, allowing researchers and the public to explore and
study rare artifacts remotely. Several articles provide an overview of particular tech-
nologies, e.g., for 3D acquisition, such as laser scanning [51] or photogrammetry [52],
and quantify their use [53]. AI-powered systems can monitor and analyze CH site
environmental conditions, helping with early detection of potential threats such as
humidity, temperature fluctuations, and structural damage. This real-time monitoring
aids in the proactive conservation and protection of cultural landmarks (e.g., [54,55]).
•
Multimodal analysis: AI is capable of bringing together different sources and types of
data. Approaches include text, images [35], 3D models [56], audio [57], and video [58].
•
AI supports or creates artistic expressions: Applying algorithms that analyze heritage
objects (or entire collections) and extract information that either artists and other
creators can use to create new works [59] or AI creating “artistic” expressions (review
article: [60]; empirical study: [61]).


Heritage 2024, 7
798
3. Project Examples
To date, there are some impressive examples of the utilization of AI technologies in
the field of CH (Table 1).
Table 1. Project examples of AI application in CH (all links accessed on 1 December 2023).
 
Art Transfer by Google Arts & Culture
Using AI algorithms, Art Transfer allows users
to transform their photos into the style of
famous artists such as Van Gogh or Picasso.
Link: https://artsandculture.google.com/
camera/art-transfer
 
MicroPasts by the British Museum
MicroPasts is a project that combines
crowd-sourced data with AI technology.
Volunteers contribute by digitizing and tagging
images while AI algorithms analyze the data.
Link: https://micropasts.org/
 
4Dcity by the University of Jena
This application uses AI to automatically 4D
reconstruct past cityscapes from historical
cadastre plans and photographs. This 4D
model is world-scale and enriched by links to
texts and information, e.g., from Wikipedia,
and accessible as mobile 4D websites [62].
Link: https://4dcity.org/
 
SCAN4RECO
This EU-funded project combines 3D scanning,
robotics, and AI to create digital
reconstructions of damaged or destroyed
CH objects.
Link: https://scan4reco.iti.gr/
 
AI-DA by Aidan Meller Gallery
AI-DA is an AI-powered robot artist developed
by Aidan Meller Gallery in the United
Kingdom. The robot uses AI algorithms to
analyze and interpret human facial expressions,
creating drawings and paintings inspired by
the emotions it perceives. AI-DA’s artworks
have been exhibited in galleries across Europe.
Link: https://www.ai-darobot.com/


Heritage 2024, 7
799
Table 1. Cont.
 
Transkribus by Read Coop SCE
Transkribus is a comprehensive solution for
digitization, AI-powered text recognition,
transcription, and searching historical
documents. A specific emphasis is on
handwritten text recognition.
https://readcoop.eu/transkribus/
 
Transcribathon
The Transcribathon platform is an online
crowd-sourcing platform for enriching
digitized material from Europeana. It applies
the Transkribus handwriting recognition
technology to input documents, performs some
automatic enrichments (including translation)
on the obtained text and metadata, and lets
volunteers validate the results.
https://transcribathon.eu/
 
The Next Rembrandt by ING Bank
and Microsoft
This project employed AI algorithms to analyze
Rembrandt’s works and create a new painting
in his style.
https://www.nextrembrandt.com/
 
Rekrei (formerly Project Mosul)
Rekrei is a crowd-sourcing and AI project
aimed at reconstructing CH sites that have
been destroyed or damaged. Users can
contribute photographs and other data, and AI
algorithms help in reconstructing the lost
heritage digitally.
https://rekrei.org/
 
Notre Dame reconstruction
After a fire destroyed parts of the Notre Dame
Cathedral in Paris in 2019, a digital twin model
was created to experiment—physical
anastylosis, reverse engineering,
spatiotemporal tracking assets, and operational
research—and create a reconstruction
hypothesis. The results demonstrate that the
proposed modeling method facilitates the
formalization and validation of the
reconstruction problem and increases solution
performance [63].
https://news.cnrs.fr/articles/a-digital-twin-
for-notre-dame


Heritage 2024, 7
800
Table 1. Cont.
 
Finto AI by the National Library of Finland
Finto AI is a service for automated subject
indexing. It can be used to suggest subjects for
text in Finnish, Swedish, and English. It
currently gives suggestions based on concepts
of the General Finnish Ontology, YSO. Link:
https://ai.finto.fi
Europeana Translate
This project has trained translation engines on
metadata from the common European data
space on cultural heritage in order to obtain a
service that can translate CH metadata from
22 official EU languages to English, improving
the multilingual experience provided to its
users. It has been applied to 29 million
metadata records so far.
Link: https://pro.europeana.eu/post/
europeana-translate-project-brings-together-
multilingualism-and-cultural-heritage
 
MuseNet by OpenAI
MuseNet composes original music in a wide
range of styles and genres. It can create music
inspired by different cultural traditions and
historical periods, demonstrating the potential
of AI in generating new compositions that
reflect CH.
Link: https://openai.com/research/musenet
 
The Hidden Florence by the University of
Exeter
The Hidden Florence is an AI-enhanced mobile
app that guides visitors through the streets of
Florence, Italy, offering insights into the city’s
rich CH in an engaging way. The app utilizes
AI algorithms to provide location-based
narratives, AR experiences, and
interactive storytelling.
Link: https://hiddenflorence.org/
 
Smartify App by Smartify
Smartify utilizes AI to provide interactive
experiences with artworks in museums and
galleries. The mobile app uses image
recognition to identify artworks, delivering
detailed information, audio guides, and
curated tours. It is compatible with numerous
cultural institutions across Europe and beyond.
Link: https://smartify.org/


Heritage 2024, 7
801
Table 1. Cont.
 
Second Canvas App by Madpixel and the
Prado Museum
The app uses AI technology to enhance the
visitor experience. It provides high-resolution
images of artworks, along with interactive
features that allow users to explore the details
and stories behind the paintings.
Link: https://www.secondcanvas.net/
 
WAIVE
WAIVE is a smart DJ system utilizing AI to
create unique music samples, beats, and loops
from the digitized audio archives of the
Netherlands Institute for Sound & Vision.
Link: https:
//www.thunderboomrecords.com/waive
4. AI Technologies for CH State of the Art
The state of the art of AI for CH has been analyzed in various publications.
1.
Fiorucci et al. analyzed the current situation on AI for CH in 2020 with regard to both
ML approaches and application examples [27].
2.
A high-level view on overall challenges and examples for AI for CH and museums
was compiled by the European Commission in 2022 ([64], pp. 143), similarly about
challenges and institutional positions as a briefing for the European Parliament in
2023 [65].
3.
The EuropeanaTech AI task force conducted a survey amongst professionals to exam-
ine the usage and prospects of AI in that field [66].
4.
A curated list of policy documents—with only a few links to CH currently–is main-
tained by the Council of Europe [4].
5.
Gasparini and Kautonen examined the state of AI for libraries [67], and Mishra for
building heritage monitoring [54]. The AI4LAM maintains a list of resources and
projects, particularly on AI for CH [3].
The following paragraphs describe the state of the art of AI in several fields of CH
with regard to the type of material.
4.1. AI and Images
Historical images hold immense value in documenting our collective heritage. How-
ever, analyzing and extracting information from these images manually can be limited,
e.g., due to the required effort. Current evolvements in computer visualization are closely
coupled to the massive renaissance in ML [68] with the use of convolutional neural net-
works (CNNs, cf. [69]). There is a large number of computer vision techniques employed
in historical image analysis [70,71], including:
•
Content-based image retrieval: Efficient retrieval and exploration of historical images
based on visual similarity and content-based features. However, traditional ML tech-
nologies currently require large-scale training data [27,72–74], which are only capable
of recognizing well-documented and visually distinctive landmark buildings [62] but
fail to deal with less distinctive architecture, such as houses of similar style. Even
using more advanced ML approaches or combining different algorithms [75] only
allows the realization of prototypic scenarios [76,77].
•
Image-based localization: Connecting images with the 3D world relevant for AR/VR
applications requires estimating the original six-degree-of-freedom (6DOF) camera
pose. While several methods exist for homogeneous image blocks [78,79], the problem


Heritage 2024, 7
802
becomes increasingly complex for varying radiometric and geometric conditions,
especially relevant for historical photographs [80].
•
Image recognition and classification: Identifying objects, scenes, or people depicted
in historical images using deep learning models, such as CNNs. This field ranges from
the detection of WW2 bomb craters in historical aerial images [81], via historical photo
content analysis [82] to historical map segmentation [83–85].
•
Semantic segmentation and object detection: Locating and recognizing specific
objects or regions of interest within historical images using techniques like Faster
R-CNN and YOLO. In semantic segmentation, to classify parts of images [74,86,87].
•
Image restoration and enhancement: Repairing and enhancing degraded or dam-
aged historical images through techniques like denoising, inpainting, and super-
resolution [88,89].
4.2. AI and Text
Historical texts provide a rich source of information for understanding the past.
However, the sheer volume and complexity of historical archives make manual analysis
laborious and time-consuming [90]. ML algorithms supported these processes in various
ways—from optical character recognition (OCR) to automating the extraction of knowledge
and patterns from historical texts [90–92]. Approaches include these ML approaches
commonly used in historical text analysis:
•
NLP techniques: Named entity recognition, part-of-speech tagging, sentiment analy-
sis, and topic modeling. The most recent applications of CNNs and Transformer [93]
are consistently successful in accurately extracting and reducing the number of errors
even with unsupervised pre-training.
•
Text classification algorithms: Naive Bayes, Support Vector Machines, and Ran-
dom Forests.
•
Sequence models: Hidden Markov models, conditional random fields, and recurrent
neural networks.
In addition, various preprocessing techniques are used for historical texts to enable
their digital processing and respond to challenges such as linguistic variations, archaic
vocabulary, and textual degradation:
•
Preprocessing: Includes character recognition (e.g., OCR), unification, processing of
spelling variations and alignment to controlled vocabularies (e.g., [94]).
•
Postprocessing: Used to check and correct any OCR reading errors via neural network
approaches [95].
4.3. AI and Virtual 3D Objects
The application of AI in 3D for CH has gained significant attention in the research com-
munity to enhance the analysis, interpretation, and preservation of CH in 3D environments.
Here are some key areas of scientific analysis:
•
Object recognition and classification and semantic segmentation: In 3D/4D recon-
struction of CH, ML-based technologies are currently used primarily for specific tasks.
This involves AI models to identify specific architectural elements, artifacts, or decora-
tive motifs, to recognize specific objects [72–74,96], and to preselect imagery [97,98].
Other tasks include AI-based semantic segmentation techniques to partition 3D models
into meaningful regions or components [99].
•
3D model creation: Research has focused on developing AI-based algorithms for
efficient and accurate 3D reconstruction of CH objects, buildings, and sites. Traditional
algebraic approaches, as in photogrammetry, employ algorithms within equations,
e.g., to detect, describe, and match geometric features in images [100] and to create 3D
models. ML approaches are currently heavily researched and used for image and 3D
point cloud analytics in CH (recent overview: [27]), but increasingly for 3D modeling
tasks. Generative adversarial networks (GAN), a combination of the proposal and


Heritage 2024, 7
803
assessment components of ML, are frequently employed as approximative techniques
in 3D modeling, e.g., for single photo digitization [101], completion of incomplete 3D
digitized models [102,103] or photo-based reconstructions [104]. Recent approaches
include neural radiance fields (NeRF) [105–108], which have shown strength in cre-
ating 3D geometries from sparse and heterogeneous imagery and short processing
time [109,110].
•
Image to visualization approaches: Approaches bypass the modeling stage to generate
visualizations directly from imagery [72,111,112], e.g., by transforming or assembling
image content (recent image generators like DALL-E [113], Stable Diffusion or Mid-
journey). Other approaches based on NeRF to predict shifting spatial perspectives
even from single images [114] can predict 3D geometries.
•
Use of ML algorithms to detect patterns, anomalies, or changes over time within 3D
models (e.g., [54]). The analysis involves assessing the effectiveness of AI in extract-
ing meaningful information from large-scale 3D datasets, supporting archaeological
research, conservation efforts, or architectural analysis.
4.4. AI and Maps
The application of AI to cartographic corpora is relatively new and for now primarily
addresses the need to segment historical cartography to extract graphs and assign semantic
classes to them. To date, these approaches are still entirely manual in many cultural institu-
tions, making it possible to extract useful information on the stylistic-graphic evolution
of cartography or graphical elements of the past, such as the road network [115] or the
footprints of buildings on a large scale. Recently, the CNN approach has inaugurated
some promising lines of study on segmentation [116–118]. Historical cadastres provide a
stable geometric medium to infer procedural 3D reconstructions [119]. Because of their
visual homogeneity, they can be segmented and annotated using CNN and Transformer
approaches [120,121].
Another approach to automatically generating 3D/4D models comprises building
footprint recognition and parametric modeling. Footprint recognition via semantic seg-
mentation for aerial/satellite imagery [122–125] or from current cadastral data [126] and
for contemporary photography [127] has been frequently researched. One issue in bound-
ary detection workflows is overlapping building boundaries and texts. Consequently,
many approaches combine text recognition and boundary delineation [128–131] to trace
building footprints.
4.5. AI and Music
The International Society for Music Information Retrieval defines Music Information
Retrieval (MIR) as “a field that aims at developing computational tools for processing,
searching, organizing, and accessing music-related data” [132]. MIR utilizes various com-
putational methods such as signal processing, ML, and data mining (i.e., [133]). MIR may
use various forms of music data such as audio recordings, sheet music, lyrics, and metadata.
Supervised ML relies on the accessibility of large datasets of annotated data. However, the
dataset size can be increased by data augmentation. For sound, two data augmentation
methods may be used: transformation and segmentation. Sound transformation transforms
a music track into a set of new music tracks by applying pitch-shifting, time-stretching, or
filtering. For sound segmentation, one splits a long sound signal into a set of shorter time
segments [134].
In terms of digital CH and its research, the following areas of MIR are relevant:
•
Automated music classification utilizes computer algorithms and ML techniques
to automatically categorize music into classes or genres based on features extracted
from the music data. Automated music classification has various applications, such as
organizing music libraries and archives, and assisting in music research. Music-related
classification tasks include mood classification, artist identification, instrument recog-


Heritage 2024, 7
804
nition, music annotation, and genre classification. For instance, one study investigates
automatic music genre classification model creation using ML [135].
•
Optical Music Recognition (OMR) research investigates how to computationally
read music notation in documents [136]. OMR is a challenging process that differs
in difficulty from OCR and handwritten text recognition because of the properties
of music notation as a contextual writing system. First, the visual expression of
music is very diverse. For instance, the Standard Music Font Layout [137] lists over
2440 recommended characters and several hundred optional glyphs. Second, it is only
their configuration—how they are placed and arranged on the staves and with respect
to each other—that specifies what notes should be played. The two main goals of
OMR are:
1.
Recovering music notation and information from the engraving process, i.e.,
what elements were selected to express the given piece of music and how they
were laid out. The output format must be capable of storing music notation,
e.g., MusicXML [138] or MEI [139].
2.
Recovering musical semantics (i.e., the notes, represented by their pitches,
velocities, onsets, and durations). MIDI [140] would be an appropriate output
representation for this goal.
•
Automatic Music Transcription (AMT) is the process of automatically converting au-
dio recordings of music into symbolic representations, such as sheet music
(e.g., MusicXML or MEI) or MIDI files. AMT is a very useful tool for music analysis.
AMT comprises several subtasks: (multi-)pitch estimation, onset and offset detection,
instrument recognition, beat and rhythm tracking, interpretation of expressive timing
and dynamics, and score typesetting. Due to the very nature of music signals, which
often contain several sound sources that produce one or more concurrent sound events
that are meant to be highly correlated over both time and frequency, AMT is still
considered a challenging and open problem [141].
4.6. AI and Audiovisual Material
Audiovisual heritage includes various materials such as films, videos, and multimedia
content. AI for audiovisual heritage supports various aspects of preserving, analyzing,
enhancing, and making accessible audiovisual content of historical and cultural significance.
Key areas of application for AI in audiovisual heritage include:
•
Digitization and restoration: AI assists in digitizing and restoring deteriorating audio-
visual materials, improving their quality and preserving their historical significance.
•
Video summaries: Can speed up the process of finding content in audiovisual
archives [142].
•
Content analysis and knowledge extraction: AI algorithms analyze audio and visual
elements within content to identify patterns, objects, scenes, speakers, and other
relevant information. It can also help to spot biases and contentious terms and track
semantic drift in metadata, supporting curators, cataloguers, and others in deciding
on potentially updating catalog records [143].
•
Metadata enhancement: AI enriches metadata for better content organization, search,
and context by extracting keywords or using LLMs to organize and enrich metadata
records at scale.
•
Transcription and translation: AI-powered speech-to-text transcription and transla-
tion services make audiovisual content more accessible and understandable to a wider
audience [144].
•
Partial audio matching: Supports framing analysis in identifying segments in one
source audio file that are identical to segments in another target audio file. Framing
analysis can reveal patterns and biases in the way content is being recontextualized in
the media to shape public discourse [145].
•
Cross-modal analysis: AI techniques analyze both audio and visual components of
content, facilitating holistic interpretation and understanding.


Heritage 2024, 7
805
•
Interactive storytelling and content-generation interfaces: AI-powered interactive
narratives and documentaries engage users with historical events and cultural context.
AI can further enhance access by using fine-grained and time-based data extracted
by AI systems as a basis for creating “generous interfaces” that allow for the rich
exploration of CH collections [146,147] and using conversational speech to provide
new ways of interacting with audiovisual collections [148].
5. Challenges and Opportunities for AI and CH
5.1. Quality
The analysis of historical images presents unique challenges. These include (a) source
degradation and preservation issues related to fading, noise, scratches, and other types
of damage present in historical sources; (b) handling diverse formats, resolutions, and
color spaces of historical images captured using different cameras and techniques over
time; (c) dealing with the scarcity of historical sources poses challenges, e.g., for training
ML models.
5.2. Quantity and Historical Singularity
High-quality and diverse datasets are fundamental for training AI models. Particularly
in CH, datasets often suffer from limited availability, data gaps, and challenges related to
data annotation and standardization [149–151]. Unlike in, for instance, medical AI [152],
an optimized heuristic interpretation is not sufficient for historical sources and their singu-
larity [27]. Current approaches to employing AI in heritage validate their results only for
some examples [153]. Considering the singularity of history, there is a need to establish
full-scale cross-validation of AI-based predictions of historical situations. Examples are
cross-validating mixed-methods [154] or human-in-the-loop approaches.
5.3. Time and Temporal Transition
Time and non-linear temporal change are the main elements of history and heritage.
Current approaches focus mostly on specific timestamps. This is challenging since it re-
quires multiple sources for these reconstructions, often taken at very different times and
with each source being a singular document of the represented state. In addition to the
issue of inter- or extrapolating sources of different times to gain a coherent historical view,
the dating of sources is challenging. Historical imagery is still primarily classified by
time via metadata captured at recording or amended at later points. Where metadata are
unavailable or uncertain, change detection can be applied to image series, e.g., to assess if
undated images show corresponding states of construction to the dated ones. Time and
non-linear temporal change are the main elements of history and heritage. Current algorith-
mic change detection focuses on homogenous quality images, such as time series of satellite
images [155–157] or aerial photos [158,159]. Approaches for heterogeneous photographs
can deal with large-scale changes but are limited to subtle changes (overviews: [160–162]).
Other change detection approaches work with 3D geometries (overview [163]) or seg-
mentation and feature-based comparison between different images to identify changes in
architectural features [80].
5.4. Transparency and Explainable Artificial Intelligence for History and Heritage
As AI models become more complex, explainability and interpretability become crucial
in the CH domain. Since algebraic approaches are reproducible, ML approaches are still
primarily applied within black box settings with non-transparent decision-making [27,164].
Consequently, a key research focus is explainable AI [165]; understanding the decision-
making process of AI systems is essential for building trust and for enabling human experts
to verify, validate, and interpret the outcomes generated by AI algorithms.


Heritage 2024, 7
806
5.5. Ethical Considerations and Bias
Numerous policy documents target ethics for AI [166–169]. As a consensus, AI ap-
plications in CH should address ethical considerations such as privacy, data security, and
cultural sensitivity [170]. AI algorithms should be designed and evaluated to mitigate
biases and ensure fairness and inclusivity in CH representation and interpretation.
5.6. Data Availability, Accessibility and Quality
Accessibility and availability of data are big challenges of digital humanities and
heritage [171,172], including when data access is limited by legal barriers or company
ownership. Privately owned data is potentially at risk of being locked away and inacces-
sible [173]. In addition, much data is currently not properly accessible due to insufficient
tagging, indexing or linking [172]. Despite many attempts to increase the amount of high-
quality online data, e.g., through massive digitization campaigns, art historians still have
limited access to digital resources containing primary material and good-quality open
access visual information, which is digitized and presented according to their preferences
and needs. Areas of art history subject to little research, such as digital art history and
non-Western art, face greater difficulties with availability. Developers need to understand
these scholars’ needs to build appropriate digital resources. In addition, social media
companies determine who can access their vast datasets necessary for model training. In
the next ten years, we hope to see heritage organizations emerging as strong competitors in
this domain, offering access to high-quality, culturally aware, and contextualized datasets.
To get there, we need to see concerted advocacy efforts from the European media industry
and the research community to radically increase open access to media collections, ensuring
that scholars and ML engineers have the right resources and skills to develop AI tools [143].
5.7. Interdisciplinary Collaboration
Promoting collaboration between AI researchers, CH experts, archaeologists, histo-
rians and other relevant disciplines is crucial. Bridging the gap between technology and
domain expertise can foster innovation and ensure that AI solutions are tailored to CH’s
specific needs and contexts. Insights could be retrieved via different methods such as gener-
ating, quantifying, and explaining phenomena (e.g., [174]). As concerns grow about biases
and social injustices replicated and amplified by commercial AI systems, the interaction of
AI experts with social sciences and humanities scholars becomes more significant. The goal
is to question current practices and collaboratively develop more equitable solutions. The
critical analytical approach that scholars apply when working with AI tools would result in
better-tailored research tools and better AI models and practices that could be transferred
to wider societal contexts.
5.8. Education
Educational programs on digital heritage are driven by traditional fields such as digital
archaeology, digital curation, or digital conservation, as well as related areas, including
digital humanities. In addition to higher education, there is a wide spectrum of courses
in vocational education (e.g., the EU Codeweek program, DARIAH Teach, PARTHENOS,
DHSI, etc.) and frameworks for training and qualification activities (within ERASMUS+,
COST etc.) [175]. Due to the rapid technological development in AI and the multitude of
tasks for heritage professionals, there is a high demand for multidisciplinary skills and
continuing professional development.
5.9. Customization
Users (such as humanities scholars) should be able to tailor and experiment with
the parameters of tools, allowing them to refine existing models by incorporating custom
concepts relevant to their research. For example, they should be able to fine-tune models
through methods like few-shot learning. Additionally, these users should be able to
create collaborative experimentation environments, facilitating comparative analyses. This


Heritage 2024, 7
807
approach would empower researchers to attain more gratifying and meaningful results
and enhance their overall confidence in AI techniques, enabling them to engage with them
critically [143].
5.10. AI for CH as a Business Sector
Digital heritage is an important business sector, and the provision of digital tools and
applications for CH institutions has contributed to the development of many SMEs. The
market structure in digital heritage is different from other sectors due to the intangible na-
ture of assets, the niche nature of some markets, and the importance of public funding [176].
Very few medium-sized enterprises are extant, which contrasts with many micro and small
enterprises. Consequently, the CH sector needs tailored support instruments, e.g., funding
or training, to address its specific AI needs.
6. Strategy and Agenda for Digital Heritage Innovation
We propose a strategy and agenda for AI for heritage and innovation to meet the
mentioned challenges. Forecasting actions on AI include:
1.
The FUTURES4EUROPE, conducted on behalf of the European Commission DG RTD,
was a Delfi-like expert review to identify and scope future AI directions [165]
2.
The Millennium Project developed ideas, strategies, and global governance models
for Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) [177].
3.
AI for archives [178] provide views and demands of this particular subdomain of the
heritage sector.
4.
The Time Machine FET-Flagship CSA conducted various workshops, surveys and
scoping activities in 2019 and 2020 to develop a roadmap for large-scale research
initiatives [179].
5.
The ARCHE project reviewed future-oriented literature spanning the environment,
economics, health, education, arts and culture, and heritage to identify megatrends,
cross-cutting themes and possible opportunities for action for the heritage sector [180]
6.
ELISE’s 2021 Strategic Research Agenda set out the research challenges that needed to
be addressed to strengthen the technical capabilities of AI, improve its performance
in deployment, and align AI development with societal interests [181]
Based on these strategies, topics, and challenges highlighted in the previous sections,
we would like to propose an AI agenda for CH (cf. Table 2).
Table 2. R&D Agenda for AI for Cultural Heritage.
R&D AGENDA FOR AI FOR CH
Understanding the challenges and opportunities of AI and CH
Despite much research, a full understanding of how AI and CH could contribute to each other is still limited. The challenge is to
understand the specific challenges and opportunities within the field and identify key research questions and problems that AI can
address, such as artifact analysis, preservation, restoration, historical context understanding, and public engagement. Vice versa,
CH could contribute to the development of AI regarding specific data and problems, problem authoring, and results interpretation.
Data collection and curation
Since data collection and suitable training data is an all-time challenge of AI, CH applications increase the complexity of gathering,
annotating, and curating the data to create training sets for AI models taking into account specific CH aspects, e.g., time variance,
digitized analog material, or heterogeneous media sets.
Domain-specific AI challenges
CH poses some unique challenges to the development of AI applications:
•
Non-linearity of history: Specifically, time variance and singularity of historical sources. Current AI approaches heavily rely
on approximation.
•
Heterogeneity of heritage objects: Sparse, incomplete, and heterogeneous data, metadata, and paradata.
•
Complex nature of CH objects: Multiple and often conflicting meanings arise from the historical sources and data.


Heritage 2024, 7
808
Table 2. Cont.
Domain-specific AI applications
Develop and fine-tune AI models tailored to CH tasks such as:
•
Image recognition models for identifying artifacts, styles, and artistic techniques.
•
NLP models for analyzing historical texts and documents.
•
3D modeling and computer vision for virtual reconstructions.
•
AI tools that assist in analyzing artifacts, identifying patterns, and extracting insights.
•
Algorithms that can determine provenance, age, authenticity, and stylistic influences.
•
Imaging techniques to identify deterioration and suggest restoration approaches.
•
Frame analysis to support media studies research.
Cross-domain opportunities
CH comprises a wide variety of AI usage scenarios— from tourism to research and education. A cross-cutting demand and
prerequisite for employing AI is to make data connectible and, therefore, employ metadata schemes and vocabularies capable of
dealing with different data types and domains.
Context understanding and information enrichment
There is an increasing move towards multimodality to include images, texts, and audio into a joint frame of reference, mixed
methods combining AI with algebraic approaches, and information enrichment using domain and object-specific understanding to
enhance the quality of information (e.g., [182]). Together, these can be used to build AI systems that can contextualize
historical artifacts.
Ethical considerations and transparency
Biased collections and dominating cultural narratives have been flagged as a major challenge of CH [183]. AI intensifies this
challenge by the tendency to replicate dominant features and create limited explainable results [184]. A resultant challenge is to
ensure that AI systems respect cultural sensitivities and do not perpetuate biases [167].
Interdisciplinary collaboration
CH as a field is marked by high complexity and “fuzzy” problems, which are challenging to transpose into computable
approaches [185]. A resultant challenge is to foster collaboration between AI researchers, CH experts, computer scientists, and
ethicists to ensure appropriate, high-quality, and meaningful results.
Human in the loop
Dealing with CH is still highly influenced by personal expertise and tacit knowledge [173]. It is therefore important to rigorously
evaluate AI models’ performance against established benchmarks and human expertise and continuously improve models based
on feedback from domain experts.
Long-term sustainability
Currently, most heritage data, AI models, and resources are held by companies outside Europe [50]. It is a major challenge to ensure
the long-term maintenance, availability, and sustainability of AI tools, data, and platforms and foster open-source and open-data
initiatives to not lose control and access to heritage and culture.
Legal and intellectual property considerations
CH in Europe is faced with a currently heterogeneous and highly complex legal situation (recently: [185,186]); thus, it is also
challenging for AI technologies [4]. A resultant demand is to create and maintain an appropriate legal framework when working
with AI for CH.
AI for heritage education
Adequate skills have been named as the most important challenge for heritage institutions in the digital realm [187]. Currently,
qualifications and skills are mainly taught within academic programs [175]. Against the background of rapid technological
developments CH stakeholders need continuous professional development and lifelong learning to be skilled to assess, apply, and
reflect on AI.
Heritage innovation support
Due to the specifics of the heritage sector, most extant programs to support AI implementation in the European innovation
landscape are limited and only applicable to this domain [176]. Intermediaries and tailoring of support offers are needed to
successfully connect AI infrastructures, technology providers, financers and the CH sector.
7. Summary
Although AI technologies have already been adopted in the CH sector with a multitude
of applications all over Europe, the full potential of AI for economic, social, and cultural
change is not yet fully visible. This article provides an overview of current AI technologies
and applications in the cultural sector and their challenges. Since CH is currently primarily
another field of application for AI technologies, it poses several unique challenges for AI


Heritage 2024, 7
809
research and development and application in innovation contexts. The authors sketch a
R&D agenda to guide the next steps of the EIT Climate & Culture STG towards a European
AI for CH.
7.1. Discussion
Current trends in AI development such as AGI [177], Explainable AI [188], Human-in-
the-Loop [189,190], or recent developments regarding LLMs or computer vision are also
of high relevance and applicability to the heritage sector. In addition, several challenges
already identified by generic AI roadmapping initiatives are important for the CH sector,
too, for example, the need for qualification, evaluation and benchmarking, e.g., of expertise,
or the establishment of sufficient legal and ethical frameworks. In addition, there are several
unique challenges and opportunities in this area. Specific challenges arise from the diverse,
complex and fuzzy nature of heritage and humanities paradigms [185], the incomplete,
heterogeneous and sparse information available and the diversity of applications. Vice
versa, there may be a unique contribution to the paradigm of humanities and cultural
heritage can make to the interpretation and understanding of causalities and singularities,
which is still a challenge for AI today (see, e.g., [174]).
7.2. Limitations and Implications
The main scope of this article is to provide an overview of the current state of play
and to highlight the specific challenges and opportunities of intertwining cultural heritage
and AI. Although this article is based on various mapping activities and research studies, it
is not a meta-analysis [191] but designated to provide stakeholders in the field of cultural
heritage and AI and authorities and innovators a current and comprehensive overview.
As another limitation, the article focuses mainly on a European community, although the
challenges and needs highlighted in the article are globally relevant.
Author Contributions: All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This study is based on research carried out in projects funded by EU KIC SUGA (grant
number: 101112064), BMBF HistKI (grant number: 01UG2120), EU DEP 5DCulture (101100778),
C4Education (grant number: 101060350), and DigiCHER (grant number: 101132481).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the Declara-
tion of Helsinki. Ethical review and approval were waived since individual behaviors or attitudes
were not the study’s subject. All recorded personal information was pseudonymized. Informed
consent was obtained from all people involved in the user-related studies.
Acknowledgments: We thank Kate Sotejeff-Wilson for her copyediting.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflicts of interest.
References
1.
Europeana. Report on ENUMERATE Core Survey 4. 2017. Available online: https://pro.europeana.eu/files/Europeana_
Professional/Projects/Project_list/ENUMERATE/deliverables/DSI-2_Deliverable%20D4.4_Europeana_Report%20on%20
ENUMERATE%20Core%20Survey%204.pdf (accessed on 1 December 2023).
2.
EIF. Market Analysis of The Cultural And Creative Sectors in Europe; EIF: Brussels, Belgium, 2018.
3.
AI4LAM. AI4LAM Resources. Available online: https://sites.google.com/view/ai4lam/ai-registry/resources?authuser=0
(accessed on 1 December 2023).
4.
Council of Europe. Artificial Intelligence—Council of Europe’s Work in Progress. Available online: https://www.coe.int/en/
web/artificial-intelligence/work-in-progress (accessed on 21 August 2023).
5.
Heritage Research Hub. Library. Available online: https://www.heritageresearch-hub.eu/library/ (accessed on 1 December 2023).
6.
Braun, V.; Clarke, V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res. Psychol. 2006, 3, 77. [CrossRef]
7.
Braun, V.; Clarke, V. Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis. Qual. Res. Sport Exerc. Health 2019, 11, 589–597. [CrossRef]
8.
Morgan, D.L.; Nica, A. Iterative Thematic Inquiry: A New Method for Analyzing Qualitative Data. Int. J. Qual. Methods 2020, 19,
1609406920955118. [CrossRef]
9.
UNESCO. Draft Medium Term Plan 1990–1995; UNESCO: London, UK, 1989.


Heritage 2024, 7
810
10.
UNESCO. Concept of Digital Heritage; UNESCO: London, UK, 2018.
11.
Georgopoulos, A. CIPA’s Perspectives on Cultural Heritage. In Digital Research and Education in Architectural Heritage.
In Proceedings of the 5th Conference, DECH 2017, and First Workshop, UHDL 2017, Dresden, Germany, 30–31 March 2017;
Revised Selected Papers. Münster, S., Friedrichs, K., Niebling, F., Seidel-Grzinska, A., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2018;
pp. 215–245.
12.
Ch’ng, E.; Gaffney, V.; Chapman, H. Visual Heritage in the Digital Age; Springer: London, UK, 2013.
13.
European Commission. National/Regional Innovation Strategies for Smart Specialisation; Cohesion Policy 2014–2020; European
Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2014.
14.
CHCfE Consortium. Cultural Heritage Counts for Europe. Available online: https://www.europanostra.org/tag/cultural-heritage-
counts-for-europe/ (accessed on 21 August 2023).
15.
Baregheh, A.; Rowley, J.; Sambrook, S. Towards a multidisciplinary definition of innovation. Manag. Decis. 2009, 47, 1323–1339.
[CrossRef]
16.
Granstrand, O.; Holgersson, M. Innovation ecosystems: A conceptual review and a new definition. Technovation 2020, 90, 102098.
[CrossRef]
17.
Mignosa, A. Theory and Practice of Cultural Heritage Policy. In The Artful Economist: A New Look at Cultural Economics; Rizzo, I.,
Towse, R., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 227–244. [CrossRef]
18.
European Parliamant. Cultural Heritage in EU Policies; Briefing; European Parliamant: Brussels, Belgium, 2019.
19.
Joshi, A.V. Introduction to AI and ML. In Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence; Joshi, A.V., Ed.; Springer International
Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; pp. 3–7. [CrossRef]
20.
Helm, J.M.; Swiergosz, A.M.; Haeberle, H.S.; Karnuta, J.M.; Schaffer, J.L.; Krebs, V.E.; Spitzer, A.I.; Ramkumar, P.N. Machine
learning and artificial intelligence: Definitions, applications, and future directions. Curr. Rev. Musculoskelet. Med. 2020, 13, 69–76.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Russell, S.J. Artificial Intelligence a Modern Approach; Pearson Education, Inc.: Indianapolis, IN, USA, 2010.
22.
Hunt, E.B. Artificial Intelligence; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1975.
23.
Xu, Y.; Liu, X.; Cao, X.; Cai, Z.; Wang, F.; Zhang, J. Artificial intelligence: A powerful paradigm for scientific research. Innov. 2021,
2, 100179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Bishop, C.M. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2006.
25.
Murphy, K.P. Probabilistic Machine Learning: An Introduction; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2022.
26.
Wang, H.-n.; Liu, N.; Zhang, Y.-y.; Feng, D.-w.; Huang, F.; Li, D.-s.; Zhang, Y.-m. Deep reinforcement learning: A survey. Front. Inf.
Technol. Electron. Eng. 2020, 21, 1726–1744. [CrossRef]
27.
Fiorucci, M.; Khoroshiltseva, M.; Pontil, M.; Traviglia, A.; Del Bue, A.; James, S. Machine Learning for Cultural Heritage: A
Survey. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 2020, 133, 102–108. [CrossRef]
28.
Alpaydin, E. Introduction to Machine Learning; MIT: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2020.
29.
Sagiroglu, S.; Sinanc, D. Big data: A review. In Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Collaboration Technologies
and Systems (CTS), San Diego, CA, USA, 20–24 May 2013; pp. 42–47.
30.
Wu, X.; Zhu, X.; Wu, G.-Q.; Ding, W. Data mining with big data. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 2013, 26, 97–107.
31.
Farella, E.M.; Malek, S.; Remondino, F. Colorizing the Past: Deep Learning for the Automatic Colorization of Historical Aerial
Images. J. Imaging 2022, 8, 269. [CrossRef]
32.
Moral-Andrés, F.; Merino-Gómez, E.; Reviriego, P.; Lombardi, F. Can Artificial Intelligence Reconstruct Ancient Mosaics? Stud.
Conserv. 2022, 1–14. [CrossRef]
33.
Bassier, M.; Bonduel, M.; Derdaele, J.; Vergauwen, M. Processing existing building geometry for reuse as Linked Data. Autom.
Constr. 2020, 115, 103180. [CrossRef]
34.
Europeana pro. CRAFTED: Enrich and Promote Traditional and Contemporary Crafts. Available online: https://pro.europeana.
eu/project/crafted (accessed on 1 December 2023).
35.
Rei, L.; Mladenic, D.; Dorozynski, M.; Rottensteiner, F.; Schleider, T.; Troncy, R.; Lozano, J.S.; Salvatella, M.G. Multimodal
metadata assignment for cultural heritage artifacts. Multimed. Syst. 2023, 29, 847–869. [CrossRef]
36.
Haliassos, A.; Barmpoutis, P.; Stathaki, T.; Quirke, S.; Constantinides, A. Classification and Detection of Symbols in Ancient
Papyri. In Visual Computing for Cultural Heritage; Liarokapis, F., Voulodimos, A., Doulamis, N., Doulamis, A., Eds.; Springer
International Publishing: Cham, Switzerlamd, 2020; pp. 121–140. [CrossRef]
37.
Nockels, J.; Gooding, P.; Ames, S.; Terras, M. Understanding the application of handwritten text recognition technology in
heritage contexts: A systematic review of Transkribus in published research. Arch. Sci. 2022, 22, 367–392. [CrossRef]
38.
Elsevier. Automatic Text Analysis (Compendium). Available online: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/social-sciences/
automatic-text-analysis (accessed on 1 December 2023).
39.
He, S.; Samara, P.; Burgers, J.; Schomaker, L. A multiple-label guided clustering algorithm for historical document dating and
localization. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 2016, 25, 5252–5265. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Beckstein, C.; Gramsch-Stehfest, R.; Beck, C.; Engelhardt, J.; Knüpfer, C.; Jauch, O. Digitale Prosopographie. Automatisierte
Auswertung und Netzwerkanalyse eines Quellenkorpus zur Geschichte gelehrter deutscher Eliten des 15. Jahrhunderts. In Digital
History. Konzepte. Methoden und Kritiken digitaler Geschichtswissenschaften; Döring, K.D., Haar, S., König, M., Wettlaufer, J., Eds.; De
Gruyter: Oldenbourg, Germany, 2022; pp. 151–170.


Heritage 2024, 7
811
41.
Muenster, S. Digital 3D Technologies for Humanities Research and Education: An Overview. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 2426. [CrossRef]
42.
Russo, M. AR in the Architecture Domain: State of the Art. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 6800. [CrossRef]
43.
Nechushtai, E.; Lewis, S.C. What kind of news gatekeepers do we want machines to be? Filter bubbles, fragmentation, and the
normative dimensions of algorithmic recommendations. Comput. Hum. Behav. 2019, 90, 298–307. [CrossRef]
44.
Schaffer, S.; Ruß, A.; Sasse, M.L.; Schubotz, L.; Gustke, O. Questions and answers: Important steps to let AI chatbots answer
questions in the museum. In Proceedings of the International Conference on ArtsIT, Interactivity and Game Creation; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2021; pp. 346–358.
45.
Bongini, P.; Becattini, F.; Del Bimbo, A. Is GPT-3 All You Need for Visual Question Answering in Cultural Heritage? In Proceedings
of the European Conference on Computer Vision; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2022; pp. 268–281.
46.
Casillo, M.; Colace, F.; Conte, D.; Lombardi, M.; Santaniello, D.; Valentino, C. Context-aware recommender systems and cultural
heritage: A survey. J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput. 2023, 14, 3109–3127. [CrossRef]
47.
Pavlidis, G. Recommender systems, cultural heritage applications, and the way forward. J. Cult. Herit. 2019, 35, 183–196.
[CrossRef]
48.
Bai, Z.; Nakashima, Y.; Garcia, N. Explain me the painting: Multi-topic knowledgeable art description generation. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, Montreal, BC, Canada, 11–17 October 2021; pp. 5422–5432.
49.
Cetinic, E. Iconographic Image Captioning for Artworks. In Proceedings of the ICPR International Workshops and Challenges,
Virtual Event, 10–15 January 2021; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2021; pp. 502–516.
50.
Münster, S. Advancements in 3D Heritage Data Aggregation and Enrichment in Europe: Implications for Designing the Jena
Experimental Repository for the DFG 3D Viewer. Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 9781. [CrossRef]
51.
Di Stefano, F.; Chiappini, S.; Gorreja, A.; Balestra, M.; Pierdicca, R. Mobile 3D scan LiDAR: A literature review. Geomat. Nat.
Hazards Risk 2021, 12, 2387–2429. [CrossRef]
52.
Remondino, F.; Nocerino, E.; Toschi, I.; Menna, F. A Critical Review of Automated Photogrammetric Processing of Large Datasets.
Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2017, XLII-2/W5, 591–599. [CrossRef]
53.
European Commission. Study on Quality in 3D Digitisation of Tangible Cultural Heritage: Mapping Parameters, Formats, Standards,
Benchmarks, Methodologies, and Guidelines; VIGIE 2020/654 Final Study Report; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2022.
54.
Mishra, M. Machine learning techniques for structural health monitoring of heritage buildings: A state-of-the-art review and case
studies. J. Cult. Herit. 2021, 47, 227–245. [CrossRef]
55.
Tejedor, B.; Lucchi, E.; Bienvenido-Huertas, D.; Nardi, I. Non-destructive techniques (NDT) for the diagnosis of heritage buildings:
Traditional procedures and futures perspectives. Energy Build. 2022, 263, 112029. [CrossRef]
56.
Münster, S.; Bruschke, J.; Hoppe, S.; Maiwald, F.; Niebling, F.; Pattee, A.; Utescher, R.; Zarriess, S. Multimodal AI Support of
Source Criticism in the Humanities. In Proceedings of the ADHO DH 2022, Tokyo, Japan, 25–29 July 2022.
57.
Ukolov, D. Reviving the Sounds of Sacral Environments: Personalized Real-Time Auralization and Visualization of Location-Based Virtual
Acoustic Objects on Mobile Devices; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2023; pp. 165–186.
58.
Dimitropoulos, K.; Tsalakanidou, F.; Nikolopoulos, S.; Kompatsiaris, I.; Grammalidis, N.; Manitsaris, S.; Denby, B.; Crevier-
Buchman, L.; Dupont, S.; Charisis, V.; et al. A Multimodal Approach for the Safeguarding and Transmission of Intangible Cultural
Heritage: The Case of i-Treasures. IEEE Intell. Syst. 2018, 33, 3–16. [CrossRef]
59.
Bocyte, R.; Oomen, J. Content Adaptation, Personalisation and Fine-grained Retrieval: Applying AI to Support Engagement with
and Reuse of Archival Content at Scale. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelligence
(ICAART 2020), Valletta, Malta, 22–24 February 2020. [CrossRef]
60.
Cetinic, E.; She, J. Understanding and Creating Art with AI: Review and Outlook. ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput. Commun. Appl.
2022, 18, 1–22. [CrossRef]
61.
Mikalonyt˙e, E.S.; Kneer, M. Can Artificial Intelligence Make Art?: Folk Intuitions as to whether AI-driven Robots Can Be Viewed
as Artists and Produce Art. J. Hum.-Robot Interact. 2022, 11, 43. [CrossRef]
62.
Münster, S.; Lehmann, C.; Lazariv, T.; Maiwald, F.; Karsten, S. Toward an Automated Pipeline for a Browser-Based, City-Scale
Mobile 4D VR Application Based on Historical Images. In Proceedings of the Research and Education in Urban History in the
Age of Digital Libraries; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2019; pp. 106–128.
63.
Gros, A.; Guillem, A.; De Luca, L.; Baillieul, É.; Duvocelle, B.; Malavergne, O.; Leroux, L.; Zimmer, T. Faceting the post-disaster
built heritage reconstruction process within the digital twin framework for Notre-Dame de Paris. Sci. Rep. 2023, 13, 5981.
[CrossRef]
64.
Directorate-General for Communications Networks; Content and Technology; Izsak, K.; Terrier, A.; Kreutzer, S.; Strähle, T.; Roche,
C.; Moretto, M.; Sorensen, S.; Hartung, M.; et al. Opportunities and Challenges of Artificial Intelligence Technologies for the Cultural and
Creative Sectors; Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2022. [CrossRef]
65.
Pasikowska-Schnass, M. Artificial Intelligence in the Context of Cultural Heritage and Museums: Complex Challenges and New
Opportunities; Briefing; European Parliamentary Research Service: Brussels, Belgium, 2023.
66.
EuropeanaTech. AI in relation to GLAMs Task Force. Report and recommendations; Europeana Network ASsociation: The Hague,
The Netherlands, 2023.
67.
Gasparini, A.A.; Kautonen, H. Understanding Artificial Intelligence in Research Libraries: An Extensive Literature Review. Liber
Q. Te J. Eur. Res. Libr. 2022, 32, 1–36. [CrossRef]


Heritage 2024, 7
812
68.
Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; Hinton, G.E. ImageNet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. Commun. ACM 2017,
60, 84–90. [CrossRef]
69.
Jahrer, M.; Grabner, M.; Bischof, H. Learned local descriptors for recognition and matching. Proc. Comput. Vis. Winter Workshop
2008, 2008, 39–46.
70.
Lang, S.; Ommer, B. Attesting similarity: Supporting the organization and study of art image collections with computer vision.
Digit. Scholarsh. Humanit. 2018, 33, 845–856. [CrossRef]
71.
Rodríguez-Ortega, N. Image processing and computer vision in the field of art history. In The Routledge Companion to Digital
Humanities and Art History; Routledge: London, UK, 2020; pp. 338–357.
72.
n.b. ArchiMediaL. Enriching and Linking Historical Architectural and Urban Image Collections. Available online: http:
//archimedial.net/ (accessed on 1 December 2023).
73.
Radovic, M.; Adarkwa, O.; Wang, Q.S. Object Recognition in Aerial Images Using Convolutional Neural Networks. J. Imaging
2017, 3, 21. [CrossRef]
74.
Aiger, D.; Allen, B.; Golovinskiy, A. Large-Scale 3D Scene Classification With Multi-View Volumetric CNN. arXiv 2017, preprint.
arXiv:1712.09216.
75.
Maiwald, F.; Lehmann, C.; Lazariv, T. Fully Automated Pose Estimation of Historical Images in the Context of 4D Geographic
Information Systems Utilizing Machine Learning Methods. ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2021, 10, 748. [CrossRef]
76.
Gominski, D.; Poreba, M.; Gouet-Brunet, V.; Chen, L. Challenging Deep Image Descriptors for Retrieval in Heterogeneous
Iconographic Collections. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Structuring and Understanding of Multimedia heritAge
Contents, Nice, France, 21 October 2019; pp. 31–38.
77.
Morelli, L.; Bellavia, F.; Menna, F.; Remondino, F. Photogrammetry now and then—From hand-crafted to deep-learning tie points.
ISPRS—Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2022, XLVIII-2/W1-2022, 163–170. [CrossRef]
78.
Sattler, T.; Maddern, W.; Toft, C.; Torii, A.; Hammarstrand, L.; Stenborg, E.; Safari, D.; Okutomi, M.; Pollefeys, M.; Sivic, J.; et al.
Benchmarking 6DOF Outdoor Visual Localization in Changing Conditions. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18–23 June 2018; pp. 8601–8610.
79.
Sarlin, P.-E.; Cadena, C.; Siegwart, R.; Dymczyk, M. From Coarse to Fine: Robust Hierarchical Localization at Large Scale. arXiv
2019, arXiv:1812.03506.
80.
Maiwald, F. A Window to the Past through Modern Urban Environments—Developing a Photogrammetric Workflow for the
Orientation Parameter Estimation of Historical Images. Ph.D. Thesis, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2022.
81.
Kruse, C.; Wittich, D.; Rottensteiner, F.; Heipke, C. Generating impact maps from bomb craters automatically detected in aerial
wartime images using marked point processes. ISPRS Open J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 2022, 5, 100017. [CrossRef]
82.
Chumachenko, K.; Mannisto, A.; Iosifidis, A.; Raitoharju, J. Machine Learning Based Analysis of Finnish World War II Photogra-
phers. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 144184–144196. [CrossRef]
83.
Chazalon, J.; Carlinet, E.; Chen, Y.; Perret, J.; Duménieu, B.; Mallet, C.; Géraud, T.; Nguyen, V.; Nguyen, N.; Baloun, J.; et al.
ICDAR 2021 Competition on Historical Map Segmentation; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2021; pp. 693–707.
84.
Maiwald, F.; Komorowicz, D.; Munir, I.; Beck, C.; Münster, S. Semi-Automatic Generation of Historical Urban 3D Models at a Larger
Scale Using Structure-from-Motion, Neural Rendering and Historical Maps; Münster, S., Pattee, A., Kröber, C., Niebling, F., Eds.;
Research and Education in Urban History in the Age of Digital Libraries; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2023; pp. 107–127.
85.
Vaienti, B.; Petitpierre, R.; di Lenardo, I.; Kaplan, F. Machine-Learning-Enhanced Procedural Modeling for 4D Historical Cities
Reconstruction. Remote Sens. 2023, 15, 3352. [CrossRef]
86.
Martinovic, A.; Knopp, J.; Riemenschneider, H.; Van Gool, L. 3d all the way: Semantic segmentation of urban scenes from start to
end in 3d. In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition, Boston, MA, USA, 7–12 June 2015; pp. 4456–4465.
87.
Hackel, T.; Wegner, J.D.; Schindler, K. Fast semantic segmentation of 3D point clouds with strongly varying density. ISPRS Ann.
2016, 3, 177–184.
88.
Poterek, Q.; Herrault, P.A.; Skupinski, G.; Sheeren, D. Deep Learning for Automatic Colorization of Legacy Grayscale Aerial
Photographs. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote Sens. 2020, 13, 2899–2915. [CrossRef]
89.
Huang, S.; Jin, X.; Jiang, Q.; Liu, L. Deep learning for image colorization: Current and future prospects. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell.
2022, 114, 105006. [CrossRef]
90.
Michel, J.-B.; Shen, Y.K.; Aiden, A.P.; Veres, A.; Gray, M.K.; Team, T.G.B.; Pickett, J.P.; Hoiberg, D.; Clancy, D.; Norvig, P.; et al.
Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books. Science 2011, 331, 176–182. [CrossRef]
91.
Vidhya, K.A. Text Mining Process, Techniques and Tools: An Overview. Int. J. Inf. Technol. Manag. 2010, 613–622.
92.
Ehrmann, M.; Hamdi, A.; Pontes, E.L.; Romanello, M.; Doucet, A. Named entity recognition and classification in historical
documents: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 2021, 56, 1–47. [CrossRef]
93.
Rouhou, A.C.; Dhiaf, M.; Kessentini, Y.; Salem, S.B. Transformer-based approach for joint handwriting and named entity
recognition in historical document. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 2022, 155, 128–134. [CrossRef]
94.
Utescher, R.; Patee, A.; Maiwald, F.; Bruschke, J.; Hoppe, S.; Münster, S.; Niebling, F.; Zarrieß, S. Exploring Naming Inventories for
Architectural Elements for Use in Multimodal Machine Learning Applications. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational
Methods in the Humanities 2022, Lausanne, Switzerland, 9–10 June 2022.
95.
Drobac, S.; Lindén, K. Optical character recognition with neural networks and post-correction with finite state methods. Int. J.
Doc. Anal. Recognit. (IJDAR) 2020, 23, 279–295. [CrossRef]


Heritage 2024, 7
813
96.
Khademi, S.; Mager, T.; Siebes, R. Deep Learning from History. In Proceedings of the Research and Education in Urban History in
the Age of Digital Libraries, Dresden, Germany, 10–11 October 2021; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2021; pp. 213–233.
97.
Münster, S.; Apollonio, F.I.; Bell, P.; Kuroczynski, P.; Di Lenardo, I.; Rinaudo, F.; Tamborrino, R. Digital Cultural Heritage Meets
Digital Humanities. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2019, XLII-2/W15, 813–820. [CrossRef]
98.
Bell, P.; Ommer, B. Computer Vision und Kunstgeschichte—Dialog zweier Bildwissenschaften. In Digital Art History; Kuroczynski,
P., Bell, P., Dieckmann, L., Eds.; Heidelberg University Press: Heidelberg, Germany, 2019; pp. 61–78.
99.
Russo, M.; Grilli, E.; Remondino, F.; Teruggi, S.; Fassi, F. Machine Learning for Cultural Heritage Classification. In Augmented
Reality and Artificial Intelligence in Cultural Heritage and Innovative Design Domain; Franco Angeli: Milan, Italy, 2021. [CrossRef]
100. Lowe, D.G. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 2004, 60, 91–110. [CrossRef]
101. Kniaz, V.V.; Remondino, F.; Knyaz, V.A. Generative Adversarial Networks for Single Photo 3d Reconstruction. Int. Arch.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2019, XLII-2/W9, 403–408. [CrossRef]
102. Hermoza, R.; Sipiran, I. 3D Reconstruction of incomplete Archaeological Objects using a Generative Adversarial Network. In
Proceedings of the Computer Graphics International 2018, Bintan Island, Indonesia, 11–14 June 2018; pp. 5–11.
103. Nogales Moyano, A.; Delgado Martos, E.; Melchor, Á.; García Tejedor, Á.J. ARQGAN: An evaluation of Generative Adversarial
Networks’ approaches for automatic virtual restoration of Greek temples. Expert Syst. Appl. 2021, 180, 115092. [CrossRef]
104. Microsoft In Culture. See Ancient Olympia brought to life. 2021. Available online: https://unlocked.microsoft.com/ancient-
olympia-common-grounds (accessed on 1 December 2023).
105. Mildenhall, B.; Srinivasan, P.P.; Tancik, M.; Barron, J.T.; Ramamoorthi, R.; Ng, R. NeRf: Representing scenes as neural radiance
fields for view synthesis. Commun. ACM 2021, 65, 99–106. [CrossRef]
106. Srinivasan, P.P.; Deng, B.; Zhang, X.; Tancik, M.; Mildenhall, B.; Barron, J.T. Nerf: Neural reflectance and visibility fields for
relighting and view synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2021,
Virtue, 19–25 June 2021; pp. 7495–7504.
107. Croce, V.; Caroti, G.; Luca, L.; Piemonte, A.; Véron, P. neural radiance fields (nerf): Review and potential applications to digital
cultural heritage. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2023, XLVIII-M-2-2023, 453–460. [CrossRef]
108. Kaya, B.; Kumar, S.; Sarno, F.; Ferrari, V.; Gool, L. Neural Radiance Fields Approach to Deep Multi-View Photometric Stereo. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision 2022, Waikoloa, HI, USA, 3–8 January 2022.
109. Murtiyoso, A.; Grussenmeyer, P. initial assessment on the use of state-of-the-art nerf neural network 3d reconstruction for heritage
documentation. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2023, XLVIII-M-2-2023, 1113–1118. [CrossRef]
110. Vandenabeele, L.; Häcki, M.; Pfister, M. crowd-sourced surveying for building archaeology: The potential of structure from
motion (sfm) and neural radiance fields (nerf). Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2023, XLVIII-M-2-2023,
1599–1605. [CrossRef]
111. 4dReply. Closing the 4D Real World Reconstruction Loop. Available online: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/770784
(accessed on 8 February 2022).
112. Martin-Brualla, R.; Radwan, N.; Sajjadi, M.S.M.; Barron, J.T.; Dosovitskiy, A.; Duckworth, D. NeRF in the Wild: Neural Radiance
Fields for Unconstrained Photo Collections. arXiv 2021. preprint.
113. Cho, J.; Zala, A.; Bansal, M. DALL-Eval: Probing the Reasoning Skills and Social Biases of Text-to-Image Generative Transformers.
CoRR 2022, abs/2202.04053.
114. Li, Z.; Wang, Q.; Cole, F.; Tucker, R.; Snavely, N. DynIBaR: Neural Dynamic Image-Based Rendering. arXiv 2022, arXiv:2211.11082.
115. Uhl, J.H.; Leyk, S.; Chiang, Y.-Y.; Knoblock, C.A. Towards the automated large-scale reconstruction of past road networks from
historical maps. Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 2022, 94, 101794. [CrossRef]
116. Liu, C.; Wu, J.; Kohli, P.; Furukawa, Y. Raster-To-Vector: Revisiting Floorplan Transformation. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Venice, Italy, 22–29 October 2017; pp. 2195–2203.
117. Oliveira, S.A.; Seguin, B.; Kaplan, F. dhSegment: A Generic Deep-Learning Approach for Document Segmentation. In Proceedings
of the 2018 16th International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR), Niagara Falls, NY, USA, 5–8 August
2018; pp. 7–12.
118. Ignjati´c, J.; Bajic, B.; Rikalovic, A.; Culibrk, D. Deep Learning for Historical Cadastral Maps Digitization: Overview, Challenges
and Potential. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference in Central Europe on Computer Graphics, Visualization and
Computer Vision in co-operation with EUROGRAPHICS Association 2018, Delft, The Netherlands, 16–20 April 2018. [CrossRef]
119. Kartta Labs. 2023. Available online: https://github.com/kartta-labs (accessed on 1 December 2023).
120. Petitpierre, R.; Kaplan, F.; di Lenardo, I. Generic Semantic Segmentation of Historical Maps. In CEUR Workshop Proceedings;
CEUR-WS: Aachen, Germany, 2021.
121. Petitpierre, R. Neural networks for semantic segmentation of historical city maps: Cross-cultural performance and the impact of
figurative diversity. arXiv 2020, preprint. arXiv:2101.12478.
122. Tran, A.; Zonoozi, A.; Varadarajan, J.; Kruppa, H. PP-LinkNet: Improving Semantic Segmentation of High Resolution Satellite
Imagery with Multi-stage Training. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Structuring and Understanding of Multimedia
heritAge Contents, Seattle, WA, USA, 12 October 2020; pp. 57–64.
123. Crommelinck, S.; Höfle, B.; Koeva, M.; Yang, M.Y.; Vosselman, G. Interactive Boundary Delineation from UAV data. In Proceedings
of the ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Riva del Garda, Italy, 4–7 June
2018; pp. 81–88.


Heritage 2024, 7
814
124. Chen, Q.; Wang, L.; Wu, Y.; Wu, G.; Guo, Z.; Waslander, S.L. Aerial imagery for roof segmentation: A largescale dataset towards
automatic mapping of buildings. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 2018, 147, 42–55. [CrossRef]
125. Crommelinck, S.; Koeva, M.; Yang, M.Y.; Vosselman, G. Application of Deep Learning for Delineation of Visible Cadastral
Boundaries from Remote Sensing Imagery. Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2505. [CrossRef]
126. Hecht, R.; Meinel, G.; Buchroithner, M.F. Automatic identification of building types based on topographic databases—A
comparison of different data sources. Int. J. Cartogr. 2015, 1, 18–31. [CrossRef]
127. Betsas, T.; Georgopoulos, A. 3D edge detection and comparison using four-channel images. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens.
Spat. Inf. Sci. 2022, XLVIII-2/W2-2022, 9–15. [CrossRef]
128. Oliveira, S.A.; Lenardo, I.d.; Kaplan, F. Machine Vision Algorithms on Cadaster Plans. In Proceedings of the Conference of the
International Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (DH 2017), Montreal, QC, Canada, 8–11 August 2017.
129. Herold, H.; Hecht, R. 3D Reconstruction of Urban History Based on Old Maps; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 63–79.
130. Ares Oliveira, S.; di Lenardo, I.; Tourenc, B.; Kaplan, F. A deep learning approach to Cadastral Computing. In Proceedings of the
Digital Humanities Conference, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 8–12 July 2019.
131. Heitzler, M.; Hurni, L. Cartographic reconstruction of building footprints from historical maps: A study on the Swiss Siegfried
map. Trans. GIS 2020, 24, 442–461. [CrossRef]
132. Available online: https://ismir.net (accessed on 1 December 2023).
133. MIRtoolbox. Available online: https://www.jyu.fi/hytk/fi/laitokset/mutku/en/research/materials/mirtoolbox (accessed on
1 December 2023).
134. Mignot, R.; Peeters, G. An Analysis of the Effect of Data Augmentation Methods: Experiments for a Musical Genre Classification
Task. Trans. Int. Soc. Music. Inf. Retr. 2019, 2, 97–110. [CrossRef]
135. Tulisalmi-Eskola, J. Automatic Music Genre Classification—Supervised Learning Approach. Master’s Thesis, Metropolia
University of Applied Sciences, Helsinki, Finland, 2022.
136. Calvo-Zaragoza, J.; Jr, J.H.; Pacha, A. Understanding Optical Music Recognition. ACM Comput. Surv. 2020, 53, 1–35. [CrossRef]
137. Standard Music Font Layout. Available online: https://w3c.github.io/smufl/latest/index.html (accessed on 1 December 2023).
138. Music XML. Available online: https://www.musicxml.com (accessed on 1 December 2023).
139. Music Encoding Initiative. Available online: https://music-encoding.org (accessed on 1 December 2023).
140. Official Midi Specifications. Available online: https://www.midi.org/specifications (accessed on 1 December 2023).
141. Benetos, E.; Dixon, S.; Duan, Z.; Ewert, S. Automatic Music Transcription: An Overview. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 2019, 36, 20–30.
[CrossRef]
142. Tsalakanidou, F. Deliverable 2.3—AI Technologies and Applications in Media: State of Play, Foresight, and Research Directions;
AI4Media Project (Grant Agreement No 951911); 2022. Available online: https://www.ai4media.eu/wp-content/uploads/2022
/03/AI4Media_D2.3_Roadmap_final.pdf (accessed on 1 December 2023).
143. Ferrara, A.; Montanelli, S.; Ruskov, M. Detecting the Semantic Shift of Values in Cultural Heritage Document Collections. Ceur
Workshop Proc. 2022, 3286, 35–43.
144. Van Noord, N.; Olesen, C.; Ordelman, R.; Noordegraaf, J. Automatic Annotations and Enrichments for Audiovisual Archives.
In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelligence—Volume 1: ARTIDIGH, Online, 4–6
February 2021; SciTePress: Setúbal, Portugal, 2021; pp. 633–640, ISBN 978-989-758-484-8; ISSN 2184-433X. [CrossRef]
145. Kemenade, P.v.; Bocyte, R.; Oomen, J. You’ve Been Framed—Partial Audio Matching Functionality to Support Framing Analysis.
In DARIAH Annual Event 2023: Cultural Heritage Data as Humanities Research Data? Zenodo: Budapest, Hungary, 2023; Available
online: https://zenodo.org/communities/dariahannualevent2023chdata-hrdata/ (accessed on 1 December 2023).
146. Wigham, M.; Melgar Estrada, L.; Ordelman, R.J.F. Jupyter Notebooks for Generous Archive Interfaces. In Proceedings of the 2018
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Seattle, WA, USA, 10–13 December 2018; Song, Y., Liu, B., Lee, K., Abe, N.,
Pu, C., Qiao, M., Ahmed, N., Kossmann, D., Saltz, J., Tang, J., et al., Eds.; pp. 2766–2774. [CrossRef]
147. Piet, N. Beyond Search; Netherlands Institute for Sound & Vision: Hilversum, The Netherlands, 2023. [CrossRef]
148. Beelen, T.; Velner, E.; Ordelman, R.; Truong, K.; Evers, V.; Huibers, T. Designing conversational robots with children during the
pandemic. arXiv 2022, preprint. arXiv:2205.11300.
149. Tan, C.; Sun, F.; Kong, T.; Zhang, W.; Yang, C.; Liu, C. A survey on deep transfer learning. In Proceedings of the Artificial Neural
Networks and Machine Learning–ICANN 2018: 27th International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, Rhodes, Greece,
4–7 October 2018; Proceedings, Part III 27. pp. 270–279.
150. Wang, T.; Gan, V.J. Automated joint 3D reconstruction and visual inspection for buildings using computer vision and transfer
learning. Autom. Constr. 2023, 149, 104810. [CrossRef]
151. Goodarzi, P.; Ansari, M.; Pour Rahimian, F.; Mahdavinejad, M.; Park, C. Incorporating sparse model machine learning in
designing cultural heritage landscapes. Autom. Constr. 2023, 155, 105058. [CrossRef]
152. Salahuddin, Z.; Woodruff, H.C.; Chatterjee, A.; Lambin, P. Transparency of deep neural networks for medical image analysis: A
review of interpretability methods. Comput. Biol. Med. 2022, 140, 105111. [CrossRef]
153. Farella, E.M.; Ozdemir, E.; Remondino, F. 4D Building Reconstruction with Machine Learning and Historical Maps. Appl. Sci.
2021, 11, 1445. [CrossRef]
154. Rao, R.; Fung, G. On the Dangers of Cross-Validation. An Experimental Evaluation; Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics:
Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2008; pp. 588–596. [CrossRef]


Heritage 2024, 7
815
155. Liu, S.; Bovolo, F.; Bruzzone, L.; Du, Q.; Tong, X. Unsupervised Change Detection in Multitemporal Remote Sensing Images. In
Change Detection and Image Time Series Analysis 1; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2021; pp. 1–34. [CrossRef]
156. Zhu, Z. Change detection using landsat time series: A review of frequencies, preprocessing, algorithms, and applications. ISPRS
J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 2017, 130, 370–384. [CrossRef]
157. Goswami, A.; Sharma, D.; Mathuku, H.; Gangadharan, S.M.P.; Yadav, C.S.; Sahu, S.K.; Pradhan, M.K.; Singh, J.; Imran, H.
Change Detection in Remote Sensing Image Data Comparing Algebraic and Machine Learning Methods. Electronics 2022, 11, 431.
[CrossRef]
158. Nebiker, S.; Lack, N.; Deuber, M. Building Change Detection from Historical Aerial Photographs Using Dense Image Matching
and Object-Based Image Analysis. Remote Sens. 2014, 6, 8310–8336. [CrossRef]
159. Henze, F.; Lehmann, H.; Bruschke, B. Nutzung historischer Pläne und Bilder für die Stadtforschungen in Baalbek/Libanon.
Photogramm.—Fernerkund.—Geoinf. 2009, 3, 221–234. [CrossRef]
160. Wang, Y. Change Detection from Photographs. Image Processing; Université Paul Sabatier: Toulouse, France, 2016.
161. Zhang, T.; Nefs, H.; Heynderickx, I. Change detection in pictorial and solid scenes: The role of depth of field. PLoS ONE 2017, 12,
e0188432. [CrossRef]
162. Noh, H.; Ju, J.; Seo, M.; Park, J.; Choi, D.G. Unsupervised Change Detection Based on Image Reconstruction Loss. In Proceedings
of the 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), New Orleans, LA, USA,
19–20 June 2022; pp. 1351–1360.
163. Kharroubi, A.; Poux, F.; Ballouch, Z.; Hajji, R.; Billen, R. Three Dimensional Change Detection Using Point Clouds: A Review.
Geomatics 2022, 2, 457–485. [CrossRef]
164. Zielke, T. Is Artificial Intelligence Ready for Standardization? In Proceedings of the Systems, Software and Services Process
Improvement: 27th European Conference, EuroSPI 2020, Düsseldorf, Germany, 9–11 September 2020.
165. FUTURES4EUROPE. General AI. 2021. Available online: https://www.futures4europe.eu/general-ai (accessed on 1 December 2023).
166. Amnesty International. The Toronto Declaration: Protecting the Right to Equality and Non-Discrimination in Machine Learning Systems;
Amnesty International: London, UK, 2018.
167. European Commission. Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI; Publications Office: Brussels, Belgium, 2019. Available online:
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2759/346720 (accessed on 1 December 2023).
168. Jakesch, M.; Buçinca, Z.; Amershi, S.; Olteanu, A. How Different Groups Prioritize Ethical Values for Responsible AI. In
Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 21–24 June
2022; pp. 310–323.
169. Madaio, M.; Egede, L.; Subramonyam, H.; Vaughan, J.; Wallach, H. Assessing the Fairness of AI Systems: AI Practitioners’
Processes, Challenges, and Needs for Support. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2022, 6, 1–26. [CrossRef]
170. Pansoni, S.; Tiribelli, S.; Paolanti, M.; Di Stefano, F.; Frontoni, E.; Malinverni, E.S.; Giovanola, B. Artificial intelligence and
cultural heritage: Design and assessment of an ethical framework. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2023,
XLVIII-M-2-2023, 1149–1155. [CrossRef]
171. Beaudoin, J.E. An Investigation of Image Users across Professions: A Framework of Their Image Needs, Retrieval and Use. Ph.D.
Thesis, Drexel University: Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2009.
172. Münster, S.; Kamposiori, C.; Friedrichs, K.; Kröber, C. Image libraries and their scholarly use in the field of art and architectural
history. Int. J. Digit. Libr. 2018, 19, 367–383. [CrossRef]
173. Münster, S.; Terras, M. The visual side of digital humanities: A survey on topics, researchers, and epistemic cultures. Digit.
Scholarsh. Humanit. 2020, 35, 366–389. [CrossRef]
174. Münster, S.; Utescher, R.; Ulutas-Aydogan, S. Digital Topics on Cultural Heritage quantified. Built Herit. 2021, 5, 25. [CrossRef]
175. Muenster, S.; Fritsche, K.; Richards-Risetto, H.; Apollonio, F.; Schwartze, V.; Aehnlich, B.; Smolarski, R. Teaching Digital Heritage
and Digital Humanities—A current state and prospects. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2021, XLVI-M-1-2021,
471–478. [CrossRef]
176. European Commission. Access to Finance for the Cultural and Creative Sectors. Available online: https://digital-strategy.ec.
europa.eu/en/policies/finance-cultural-creative-sectors (accessed on 1 December 2023).
177. Glenn, J.C. Artificial General Intelligence Issues and Opportunities. 2022. Available online: https://www.millennium-project.
org/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/EC-AGI-paper.pdf (accessed on 1 December 2023).
178. Colavizza, G.; Blanke, T.; Jeurgens, C.; Noordegraaf, J. Archives and AI: An overview of current debates and future perspectives.
ACM J. Comput. Cult. Herit. (JOCCH) 2021, 15, 1–15. [CrossRef]
179. Time Machine FET-FLAGSHIP-CSA. Time Machine: Big Data of the Past for the Future of Europe. A Proposal to the European Commission
for a Large-Scale Research Initiative; Time Machine Organisation: Vienna, Austria, 2020.
180. Wollentz, G.; Heritage, A.; Morel, H.; Forgesson, S.; Iwasaki, A.; Cadena–Irizar, A. Foresight for Heritage: A Review of Future Change
to Shape Research, Policy and Practice; ICCROM: Rome, Italy, 2023.
181. European Learning and Intelligent Systems Excellence (ELISE) Consortium. Creating a European AI Powerhouse. A Strategic Research
Agenda from the European Learning and Intelligent Systems Excellence (ELISE) consortium; ELISE Consortium: Brussels, Belgium, 2021.
182. Croce, V.; Caroti, G.; De Luca, L.; Jacquot, K.; Piemonte, A.; Véron, P. From the semantic point cloud to heritage-building
information modeling: A semiautomatic approach exploiting machine learning. Remote Sens. 2021, 13, 461. [CrossRef]


Heritage 2024, 7
816
183. Zhitomirsky-Geffet, M.; Kizhner, I.; Minster, S. What do they make us see: A comparative study of cultural bias in online
databases of two large museums. J. Doc. 2023, 79, 320–340. [CrossRef]
184. Osoba, O.A.; Welser IV, W. An Intelligence in Our Image: The Risks of Bias and Errors in Artificial Intelligence; Rand Corporation: St.
Monica, CA, USA, 2017.
185. Ulutas Aydogan, S.; Münster, S.; Girardi, D.; Palmirani, M.; Vitali, F. A Framework to Support Digital Humanities and Cultural
Heritage Studies Research. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Research and Education in Urban History in the Age of Digital
Libraries, Dresden, Germany, 10–11 October 2019; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2019; pp. 237–267.
186. Stamatoudi, I. Research Handbook on Intellectual Property and Cultural Heritage; Edward Elgar Publishing Limited: Cheltenham, UK,
2022.
187. Münster, S. Digital Cultural Heritage as Scholarly Field—Topics, Researchers and Perspectives from a bibliometric point of view.
J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 2019, 12, 22–49. [CrossRef]
188. Xu, F.; Uszkoreit, H.; Du, Y.; Fan, W.; Zhao, D.; Zhu, J. Explainable AI: A brief survey on history, research areas, approaches and
challenges. In Proceedings of the Natural Language Processing and Chinese Computing: 8th CCF International Conference,
NLPCC 2019, Dunhuang, China, 9–14 October 2019; Proceedings, Part II 8. pp. 563–574.
189. Mosqueira-Rey, E.; Hernández-Pereira, E.; Alonso-Ríos, D.; Bobes-Bascarán, J.; Fernández-Leal, Á. Human-in-the-loop machine
learning: A state of the art. Artif. Intell. Rev. 2023, 56, 3005–3054. [CrossRef]
190. Wu, X.; Xiao, L.; Sun, Y.; Zhang, J.; Ma, T.; He, L. A survey of human-in-the-loop for machine learning. Future Gener. Comput. Syst.
2022, 135, 364–381. [CrossRef]
191. Field, A.P.; Gillett, R. How to do a meta-analysis. Br. J. Math. Stat. Psychol. 2010, 63, 665–694. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
