Journal of
Imaging
Review
Degraded Historical Document Binarization:
A Review on Issues, Challenges, Techniques,
and Future Directions
Alaa Sulaiman *
, Khairuddin Omar and Mohammad F. Nasrudin
Pattern Recognition Research Group, Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technology, Faculty of Information
Science and Technology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), Bangi 43600, Selangor, Malaysia;
ko@ukm.edu.my (K.O.); mfn@ukm.edu.my (M.F.N.)
* Correspondence: alaasol@gmail.com
Received: 24 February 2019; Accepted: 3 April 2019; Published: 12 April 2019


Abstract: In this era of digitization, most hardcopy documents are being transformed into digital
formats. In the process of transformation, large quantities of documents are stored and preserved
through electronic scanning. These documents are available from various sources such as ancient
documentation, old legal records, medical reports, music scores, palm leaf, and reports on
security-related issues. In particular, ancient and historical documents are hard to read due to
their degradation in terms of low contrast and existence of corrupted artefacts. In recent times,
degraded document binarization has been studied widely and several approaches were developed to
deal with issues and challenges in document binarization. In this paper, a comprehensive review is
conducted on the issues and challenges faced during the image binarization process, followed by
insights on various methods used for image binarization. This paper also discusses the advanced
methods used for the enhancement of degraded documents that improves the quality of documents
during the binarization process. Further discussions are made on the eﬀectiveness and robustness of
existing methods, and there is still a scope to develop a hybrid approach that can deal with degraded
document binarization more eﬀectively.
Keywords: binarization; document degradation; image enhancement; image quality; accuracy; OCR;
image artefacts; computing; image manipulation
1. Introduction
There exist varieties of ancient and old historic document collections in a variety of holdings all
around the world, each of which are scientiﬁcally and culturally signiﬁcant [1,2]. These documents
are of importance, as the same information is not available in recent trends and most times these
documents are hand written. Due to their long-term preservations in storage or places where they are
kept, documents start to degrade in quality, which makes them diﬃcult to read; manual eﬀorts have to
be employed to re-write such documents. In order to maintain the quality of the original content and
possess greater accessibility, it becomes necessary to transform such documents into digital form [3].
This is because these documents may often be subject to degradation issues [4].
There are several methods to transform the handwritten documents to digitally compatible text.
For example, optical character recognition (OCR) can be used to read text from these documents
and store the information in digital text [3]. However, most of the OCR tools are limited by the
quality of the document available. Handwritten prehistoric documents, in general, suﬀer from various
degradations. Some of the major factors destroying the legibility of such documents include seepage of
ink, uneven illumination, image contrast variation, background “noise”, and other factors. In addition,
J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48; doi:10.3390/jimaging5040048
www.mdpi.com/journal/jimaging


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
2 of 25
handwritten text shows diﬀerent changes in stroke width, stoke connection, and pressure on the
surface. Historical documents are also aﬀected by bleed-through, an artefact like water blobs that
occurs due to one side of ink on the paper passing through to other side. Moreover, some old content in
documents may degrade due to fungus, as these documents have been kept in the same environment
for long periods of time. The above issues or artefacts existing in the original documents make it
diﬃcult for an OCR system to recognize the text accurately and store them in digital form. In order
to deal with these challenges, researchers have widely utilized image processing-based methods to
overcome diﬀerent degradations in documents. The method is referred to as image binarization.
Under these conditions, necessary ﬁltering techniques must be introduced to get rid of noise from
historical documents entirely and enhance their quality before libraries unveil them for the public to
see. The role of binarization is to make a separation between the text that appears on the foreground of
the page and the degraded background in document images. In the past, several eﬀorts have been
made by scientists to improve binarization schemes and provide a better method for the enhancement
of quality of degraded documents in order for an OCR to read and store the correct information in
digitized forms. Although several attempts have been made in the past in this domain, degraded
document binarization is still an unsolved problem for better accuracy, eﬃciency, and eﬀectiveness.
With the open area of research in this domain, this paper aims to review diﬀerent issues and challenges
in terms of degradation of documents associated with historical documents and the methods that have
been implemented to deal with such issues, followed by the future directions towards implementing
improved techniques for degraded document binarization.
2. Challenges in Historical Documents
Historical documents are the source of obtaining accurate and meaningful cultural and scientiﬁc
knowledge that can be used for the information retrieval process. These historical documents are
usually available in old libraries and reference centers of several government departments. Often,
the importance of these documents has been evidenced with respect to their scientiﬁc, legal, and cultural
values. Recently, there has been growing interest in transforming these documents into digital forms,
which converts them to digitally readable text that requires scanning, extracting text, and storing them
in a database. This process involves automatically converting handwritten documents from scanned
images to undergo OCR, which takes advantage of recognition methods to extract textual information.
However, handwritten prehistoric document in general suﬀer from various issues referred to as
document degradations. These degradations can be corrected with the help of document binarization
methods and issues can be resolved in order to extract accurate information using OCR tools. To achieve
this, there have been several approaches developed for various document binarization tasks including
palm leaf [5], music score [6], parsing ﬂoor plan [7], and historical documents. Figure 1 shows the
sample source for some of these challenges.
 
a 
b 
Figure 1. Source sample of diﬀerent degraded documents; (a) music score [6], (b) historical document [8].


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
3 of 25
Although these tasks are inherently the same, these are the same challenges in historical document
binarization which makes it a diﬃcult task for accurate binarization. Thus, the main goal of this paper
is to review the existing algorithms developed for degraded historical document binarization.
Prior to understanding and review of the degraded binarization techniques, it is extremely
important to understand the nature of defects and degradations in historical document. Figure 2
depicts the most frequently seen degraded artefacts in documents, and the following section discusses
the nature of defects in details.
 
Figure 2. Most frequently seen degraded defects in historical documents.
2.1. Uneven Illumination
In optical imaging, as incident light gets diminished exponentially along the path of light due
to spreading of particles in media, light microscopy images degrade and fall victim to uneven
illumination [8,9]. As a combined outcome of background objects, the overlays in ﬂuorescence
absorption, and emission spectra, light gets scattered, leading to uneven illumination of microscopy.
This leads to diﬃculties in document image analysis [10]. In the case of the document, when the
light condition results in an uneven illumination, recognizing characters/texts from the document
image using an OCR results in a severely unacceptable eﬀect; this may lead to various diﬃculties
in eﬃcient document recognition. Figure 3 shows examples of uneven illumination in historical
document. Generally, for OCR to provide better accuracy, the process consists of transforming an
image from grayscale to binary images and extracting the text. However, due to uneven illumination,
binary images have artefacts which result in the wrong extraction of text from artefact regions.
 
 
Figure 3. Uneven illumination in historical handwritten document from DIBCO (left) and Arabic
Databases (right).


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
4 of 25
2.2. Contrast Variation
Contrast can be deﬁned as a variation in brightness. Most times, contrast refers to the diﬀerences
between an object with high intensity and low intensity pixels in an image. The contrast can also be
measured in terms of diﬀerences between high/low pixels of an object in an image and the background
pixel values [11]. Factors such as noisy environment, sunlight, illumination, and occlusion often cause
contrast variation, which is extremely non-linear and expressive [12]. Variation in contrast existing
within historical and handwritten documents results in the document image-analysis algorithms
facing diﬃculties in terms of applying traditional threshold-based methods to separate the foreground
text from the background of document images. One can deal with such issues by applying image
enhancement methods prior to performing image binarization. Figure 4 shows an example of contrast
variations in historic and hand-written documents.
 
 
Figure 4. Degraded document images showing variation of contrast: Left image shows higher contrast
at the left edge while lower contrast is shown at the right edge of image. The right image depicts low
contrast in the middle and high contrast in both left and right edges.
2.3. Bleed-Through Degradation
Bleed-through or ink bleeding happens when the document is written on two sides of the paper
and the ink from one side starts to appear on the other side of the document. When it comes to
document binarization, bleed-through degradation poses a major threat. It takes place when ink
oozes through one side of the page and spreads across over to the other side, ruining the text there.
Many ideas were suggested to counter the issue of bleed-through, and researchers working on this issue
faced two major challenges. The ﬁrst was the diﬃculty in getting access to degraded documents of
high resolution unless in connection with a certain digitization project or library. The second challenge
is commonly seen in all restoration techniques, where issues arise at the time of analyzing outcomes
quantitatively due to unavailability of actual ground truth [13]. This issue can be solved by either
preparing an image of certain degradation quality based on the corresponding ground truth [14] or by
forming an image as ground truth by knowing the original degraded images [15]. One can always
analyze performance despite not having ground truth by quantifying the way restoration impacts a
secondary step, just like the enactment of an OCR system on a document image [16]. Figure 5 shows
an example of ink-bleed degradation.
 
 
Figure 5. Example of ink-bleed degradation in handwritten documents from DIBCO database (left)
from 2016 and (right) from 2017 databases.


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
5 of 25
2.4. Faded Ink or Faint Characters
There exists enough historical, public, and political interest when it comes to analyzing a huge
range of organizational oﬃcial papers and transforming them into digital libraries and archives.
Most of these oﬃcial papers were typewritten, which brings forward various issues regarding their
recognition [17]. To begin with, every individual glyph (character) inside the document could appear
either faint or much stronger than the glyphs around it in opposition to other printed documents.
This is directly related to both the form of the original striking head of the exact key as well as the
extent of force employed while tying. Secondly, a wide range of typewritten documents continue to last
only as carbon copies, etched on an extremely squeaky paper (Japanese paper) possessing a prominent
texture. As a result of the machine-driven nature held by the typing process (where there is need to
press the key harder in order for the printing to take place on the original and carbon copy), most carbon
copies appear blurry [18]. Issues like repeated use and ageing, tears, stains, rust from paperclips, punch
holes, disintegration of parts of documents, and discoloration negatively impact historical typewritten
documents. Figure 6 shows instances of scanned carbon-copy historical typewritten material with
faded ink degradation.
Figure 6. Example of DIBCO (left) and Arabic (right) database images showing faded degradation.
2.5. Smear or Show Through
After the documents have been digitized, more challenges come up in the form of noises and
low-resolution components appearing over the documents. Due to this, the visual appearance of the
document is negatively aﬀected [19]. There could be various forms of degradations a historical document
may be suﬀering from, all of which were introduced with time and may have diﬀering natures [20].
However, one of the largest issues in documents appears as show-through. Many documents in the
past were written on both sides of the paper [21]. The show-through problem appears when ink
impressions from one side start to appear on the other side, making the document diﬃcult to read.
These documents have to be restored in order to be easily readable. By getting rid of the show-through
issue, the image compression time reduces signiﬁcantly, allowing people to download them faster over
the internet. Figure 7 displays an instance of an old degraded historical document with the issue of
show-through or smear. A clear background can be obtained if the show-through on this image were
to be removed [19]. An example of such degradation is shown in Figure 7.
 
 
Figure 7. Example showing degraded document with smear/show-through eﬀects.


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
6 of 25
2.6. Blur
When it comes to document degradation, there are two diﬀerent types of blurring that appears in
documents: Motion blur and out-of-focus blur. In general, motion blur artefacts are caused by the
relative speed between the camera and the object, or a sudden rapid movement of camera, whereas
out-of-focus blur takes place when light fails to converge in the image. In order to ﬁx the blur issue,
the research topics as of late have turned towards the tools for assessing blur in document images to
ﬁgure out the accuracy of the OCR, hence providing the required response to the user to help them
obtain new images in the hopes of getting better OCR outcomes. Some instances of blurring issues in
degraded documents is displayed in Figure 8.
 
 
Figure 8. Example showing degraded document with blurring eﬀect.
2.7. Thin or Weak Text
Many times, documents written in the past consist of very thin or weak text.
In general,
these documents were written with the help of ink or sometimes drawn with paint. Due to the quality
of ink or paint used in historic documents, they start to degrade as their ink start to shrink. In other
cases, the use of low-quality ink and the nature of paper used also resulted in thin or weak text that
makes it diﬃcult to apply binarization methods and extract the text accurately. Researchers, as of
late, have been showing more interest in prehistoric document image analysis, which has brought
forward various new challenges. Degradation in historical documents such as weak or thin texts have
encouraged researchers to come up with enhancement and binarization algorithms good enough to
ﬁx these issues [22]. Successive phases in terms of algorithms such as skew detection, recognition,
and page or line segmentation were then created for binarized data. An example of thin or weak text is
shown in Figure 9.
 
 
Figure 9. Example showing thin or weak text from old document.
2.8. Deteriorated Documents
Original paper-based documents could be comprised of various forms of media (such as
ink, graphite, water color) and formats (such as rolled maps, spreadsheets, and record books).
These documents may well be of great importance as they contain informational, evidential,
associational, and intrinsic values [11]. A document consisting of historical, legal, or scientiﬁc data is


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
7 of 25
said to have great evidential value as long as the original condition of the media, substrate, format,
and images are not radically altered due to modiﬁcation or deterioration [13]. However, adverse
use is not the only medium through which documents face deterioration, loss, and damage [11].
Other aspects such as poor storage, handling and environmental conditions, and inherent instability
also contribute. Severe damage and deterioration can also be caused through environmental factors,
mainly when it comes to inherently unstable documents. An example of deteriorated document is
shown in Figure 10.
 
 
Figure 10. An example of deteriorated documents from DIBCO and Arabic databases.
3. Handling Historical Document Degradation Issues
Ancient and historical documents, either handwritten or printed, generally suﬀer from various
degradations. Some of the major factors destroying the legibility of such documents include seepage of
ink, uneven illumination, image contrast variation, background noise, stroke width, stroke connection,
bleed-through and water blobs. There have been several eﬀorts to handle such degradations in
historic documents. Contrasts can be deﬁned as a variation in brightness. Most of the time, it acts
as the diﬀerence between certain objects or features within the image, or among objects and the
background [11]. Factors such as noisy environment, sunlight, illumination, and occlusion often
cause contrast variation, which is extremely non-linear and expressive [9], in particular, to historical
and ancient document contrast and may vary within a scanned image due to uneven illumination.
A physics-based method was described in Reference [23] and References [24,25] to recover degraded
outdoor scene contrast. Schechner and Karpel [26] introduced a physical model that can handle
image degradation. The concept of this approach includes ﬁnding scene depth with the help of a
polarizer where a number of images are taken with varying orientations. One can deal with image
contrast issues by applying contrast enhancement techniques. Lately, a number of researchers came up
with new image enhancement models of their own to ﬁx the contrast variation and luminosity issue.
An extremely common image enhancement technique is histogram equalization (HE) [27]. This method
is usually considered for image enhancement due to the better performance and simplicity it comes
with, regardless of image type. Many researchers have also stressed the need for improving histogram
equalization-based contrast enhancement such as adaptive histogram equalization that allows one
to locally enhance contrast [28]. The fact that this technique treats the image globally makes it quite
special [27]. The method also helps in the case of images with foregrounds and backgrounds which
may be either dark or bright in degraded documents.
When it comes to document binarization, bleed-through degradation poses a major threat. It takes
place when ink oozes through one side of the page and spreads across to the other side, ruining the
text there. Many ideas were suggested to counter the issue of bleed-through, and researchers working
on this issue face two major challenges. The ﬁrst would be the diﬃculty in accessing high-resolution
degraded images unless in connection with a certain digitization project or library. The second
challenge is commonly seen in all restoration techniques, where issues arise at the time of analyzing
outcomes quantitatively due to unavailability of actual ground truth [16]. This issue can be solved by
either preparing an image of certain degradation quality based or the corresponding ground truth [14]


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
8 of 25
or by forming an image as ground truth by knowing the original degraded images [15]. Further, one can
always analyze performance despite not having ground truth by quantifying the way restoration
impacts a secondary step, just like the enactment of an OCR system on document image [16].
A majority of older works [15,29,30] are inclined towards classifying an image based on the pixels
available in the background of the image, pixels available in foreground of the image, and pixels spread
in the regions of ink bleed. The common aspect across all of these approaches is that the pixels marked
as ink-bleed have the same color of pixels as in the document background, which is approximated by
calculating the averages of the chosen background pixels. This type of binary classiﬁcation leads to a
wrong interpretation by the algorithm by classifying all the pixels as background. Rather than going
for this discrete classiﬁcation, a better idea is to ﬁgure out the amount of ink, background, and intensity
of ink-bleed at each pixel [14]. Promising progress has been made in automatic restoration of degraded
documents during the last several years. A majority of work focuses on extracting the foreground
strokes in terms of actual text and removing the ink-bleed from the document [31]. These research
works can be categorized into two categories, where one can deal with the issues with a single side
while the other can deal with these issues in terms of utilizing both sides of an image to recover as
much information as possible. The older works carried out in this ﬁeld [24,25,32] have demonstrated
various issues in terms of segmentation while dealing with single-sided images. Several methods
based on the local and global thresholding have been applied and resulted in eﬃcient performances in
the case of cleaner images with less ink-bleed artefacts. Xiaojun et al. [33] came up with an approach
towards complex ink-bleed via adaptive thresholding, wherein they ﬁrst lowered the dimensionality of
a colored image (RGB) with the help of principal component analysis (PCA), after which classiﬁcation
can be carried out through an iterative clustering of PCA data in two diﬀerent groups. In the case of
non-blind separation, wherein images from both sides of the document are utilized, an initial alignment
of these images is needed.
Wavelet-based approaches were used [34,35] to enhance the thresholding of ink-bleed pixels.
Global alignment was utilized in both of these approaches to determine the corresponding pixels of
the two images, and hence led to an imperfect overlay of both images. Ink-bleed was also successfully
reduced by Gatos et al. [36] and Moghaddam et al. [37,38] with the help of three diﬀusion models,
one for verso-foreground, one for recto-foreground, and the last one for background. Regarding
background information, real-paper scan was used with no text, while the model depended on ﬁve
user-tuned parameters. In other work, research done by Leedham et al. [15] and Baird et al. [4]
was further extended by allowing users to provide mark-up whenever required. With the help of
user-assistance, they came out with great results, even for the diﬃcult instances of strong ink-bleed.
In another study, the front and back side of ink-bleed document are used to extract information by
integrating the Chan-Vese active contour model. This is followed by using the functional minimization
method in order to remove artefacts. The method is then applied to restore information in terms of
broken foreground strokes back into the document. This approach was able to solve issues of removal
of ink-bleed from a document but failed to label the verso and recto images concurrently.
A wide range of typewritten documents continue to last only as carbon copies of originals, etched
on an extremely thin paper (Japanese paper) possessing a prominent texture. As a result of the
machine-driven nature, most text appears a blur over characters on the carbon copy [18]. The modern
commercial OCR systems do not identify most of the characters in such documents. These are some of
the well-known challenges faced by an OCR system. Few research works in the literature have reported
the binarization of typewritten documents, and those available emphasized dealing with degraded
typewritten documents prior to the OCR process in terms of their enhancement. An attempt was
made by Cannon et al. [39] to enhance bi-level images and emphasize artefacts possessing a diﬀerent
nature compared to those seen on degraded historical documents. Antonacopoulos and Karatzas [40]
came up with a study in the ﬁeld of challenging historical documents, studying the impacts of
various binarization techniques at several segmentation levels. A new text recovery approach was
established by Reference [41] mainly for typewritten documents. Both the above approaches were


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
9 of 25
based on commercial systems for character recognition. A new framework was hence developed by
Reference [42,43] for non-commercial uses.
After the documents have been digitized, more challenges come up in the form of noises and
low-resolution components appearing over the documents. Due to this, the visual appearance of the
document is negatively aﬀected [19]. However, one of the largest issues when it comes to creating
digital records of these prehistoric documents is the show-through. The show-through problem
appears when low-quality ink impressions available in one side of the document start to pass through
and appear on the other side, making the document diﬃcult to read. A clear background can be
obtained if the show-through on this image were to be removed [19]. One could apply a mechanism
to improve the contrast of an image that can also help in improving the blur edges of the sketch,
text, or the image as a whole. There have been various techniques suggested over the years to
get rid of noise from historical documents. However, these techniques work only as long as the
document is one-sided or if the show-through is really pale [20]. Kitadai et al. [44] came up with
an adaptive wavelet thresholding to help with image compression and de-noising to deal with
show-through. A newly developed system created [20] for degraded old documents was quite capable
of dealing with degradations occurring as a result of noise, low contrast, non-uniform illumination,
or shadows. A novel method for document enhancement was to bring together two of the latest
eﬃcient noise-reduction methods [20]. Xu et al. [21] invented a technique that performed anisotropic
morphological dilation with the help of implicit smoothing in order to restore degraded character
shapes of binarized images. Making the most out of the idea of geodesic morphology that states the
binary image and its distance-transformed image are always inter-convertible [44], they were able to
apply a smoothing technique to the distance-transformed image rather than the binary image, and then
re-convert the same with the help of binarization. Quraishi and Mallika De in their work [19] also
came up with a novel approach to improve ancient historical documents with a two-way approach.
Wu et al. [45] saw it best to use machine-learning approaches to estimate blur and saw a fair
bit of success in doing so. Eventually, Shoa et al. [46] suggested a revised feature-learning approach
that helps with learning features related to document image blur automatically. To get rid of this
issue, various image de-blurring methods were proposed. However, restoring the blurred image has
continued to be a challenge due to the non-linear blur motion doing its part to make this issue heavily
under-constrained. There are various de-blurring techniques mentioned in the literature [47–49],
all of which have proven to be eﬀective on natural images, but completely the opposite on degraded
document images that contain text, because of the ringing artefacts that emerge due to the de-blurring
process. Wu et al. [45] came up with a method that can deal with the de-blurring existing in degraded
documents containing text information and this was further embedded into OCR to improve the
accuracy; however, the results that surfaced later were not good enough due to the fact that the ringing
eﬀect led to image degradation. That said, restoration of blurred document images continues to stand
as a diﬃcult challenge. This has been implemented in various studies [47–49] that are using Sauvola
binarization algorithms on documents containing images with blurred text lines.
Rooms [48] serves as an instance of a segment-based OCR system that divides the lines into
character hypotheses, after which it applies a shape-based geometric classiﬁer across the outline of
every character hypothesis to identity the same. However, a very accurate segmentation of characters
is needed for such segmentation-based approaches, as inaccuracy could lead to an unreliable OCR
output. Besides, the quality of binarization steps also matters in the segmentation process. That said,
segmentation issues resulting from failures in binarization turn into low-resolution characters. In such
cases, to train on out-of-the-way images having very low resolution, a method that utilizes generative
learning is suggested. Character segmentation is carried out at the time of recognition based on
features taken out of the characters and spaces between each character. To solve the issue of accurate
segmentation, various approaches based on the hidden Markov model [50] suggested that one can
successfully use segmentation-free methods as in the case of scanning neural networks, and both would
improve the accuracy of OCR [50]. During the last few years, recurrent neural networks (RNN) have


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
10 of 25
been widely used for the prediction and classiﬁcation of time series data. In a recent work [51], recurrent
neural networks (RNN)-based methods called long short-term memory (LSTM) neural networks are
used to solve the degraded document through classiﬁcation of background and foreground pixels.
These networks have proven to be more decisive. In various cases of old documents such as Latin
scripts, Asian scripts, and text-to-speech recognition, LSTMs have been eﬃciently used and provide
better outcomes [51]. This success achieved by LSTM networks convinced us to conduct further
research into the application of LSTM networks for recognizing blurred document images. To ensure
that it no longer requires binarization or image de-blurring for blurred documents, LSTM networks
were employed directly on the grayscale images [51].
Researchers as of late have been showing more interest in pre-historic document binarization,
which has brought forward various challenges. Issues in historical scripts such as weak or thin texts
have encouraged researchers to come up with enhancement and binarization algorithms good enough to
ﬁx these issues [22,52]. As an advanced method, various algorithms as subsequent steps are developed.
These algorithms are mainly focused on skew detection, page segmentation, line segmentation,
and recognition of binarized data. In a recent work, a text-line segmentation method was developed
that can segment strong line text from the hand-written document images, old scripts, and documents
containing diﬀerent degraded documents, and this method is applied on grayscale images directly
instead of converting them to binary images. These types of documents may consist of curved text
lines, making them hard to binarize. A majority of the current text-line segmentation techniques work
only with binary images [53] and not much has been done for grayscale image segmentation [54].
So far, the best available technique for text-line segmentation is that which uses local projection proﬁle
in an image, based on their orientation. This is one of the fastest algorithms that has the capability to
perform line segmentation in documents with lines of varying moderate skew angles. The algorithm
is then extended in order to allow for any of the skew angles by adapting to the skew of every line
within the document as it goes on. This approach was able to achieve extremely accurate outcomes on
a group of documents that contains degradations in various forms with varying skew.
In summary, there have been many attempts to deal with degraded document and research is still
being carried out to overcome the degraded issues existing with historical/ancient documents in both
handwritten and printed forms. Although, a number of research studies have been conducted to deal
with degradation partially in separate studies, there is an emerging scope to solve diﬀerent types of
degradation using a single method through image binarization approaches. The next section of this
article is thus focused on the importance of document binarization, followed by the diﬀerent schemes
employed in document binarization.
4. Document Binarization
In the process of binarization, an approach is followed where some object available in an image
is separated out from the background of an image, which is referred to as thresholding. In general,
the objects in a degraded document may be presented in terms of characters, graphemes, words,
graphics, etc. The principal of thresholding works based on the fundamental idea of converting any
grayscale image into a binary image prior to processing it for further steps. This helps in reducing the
size of data that can be treated lightly during any computation process. When it comes to degraded
documents, most image binarization methods face diﬃculties due to the issues discussed in Section 2
of this article. A typical binarization method involves performing pre-processing on document images
followed by applying a thresholding/ﬁltering approach to obtain a clear image that can further be sent
to an OCR system for reading in order to extract the information in digital form, as shown in Figure 11.
Binarization is the step that is actually performed prior to performing OCR. The aim of binarization
is to separate foreground text from the background of a document. The text belongs to the foreground
and the motive is to recover the text from the degraded document images. Thresholding is an important
parameter that refers to the conversion of grayscale image to a binary image. The thresholding of
degraded documents is a major challenge. In recent times, researchers have focused on the development


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
11 of 25
of algorithms for document image binarization, and have used various image-processing approaches
to deal with issues discussed in Section 2 of this article. In the sub-sequent sections of this article,
methods for degraded document binarization are discussed with a concrete focus towards the issues
associated with ancient and historical document in terms of their degradation.
 
Figure 11. Typical architecture of degraded document binarization.
4.1. Degraded Document Binarization Methods
In the past, many methods have been proposed to address binarization of degraded documents
that usually happens due to diﬀerent artefacts/defects, as discussed in Section 2 of this article.
While looking at the trends in image binarization, they can broadly be classiﬁed as global, local,
and hybrid thresholding approaches. The methods developed using local and global approaches have
both been extensively discussed in various articles focused on degraded image binarization. In recent
times, not only the global and local, but also the hybrid thresholding, takes advantage of both local
and global thresholding as trending topics. The subsequent sections of this article thus discuss the
binarization approaches.
4.1.1. Global Thresholding-Based Binarization Methods
The term global thresholding refers to an approach of image thresholding where a single threshold
value is set for the whole image. In thresholding, the pixels are classiﬁed into groups and considered
for its inclusion and exclusion from an output image based on the set threshold limit. In this case,
for an example of a grayscale image, ﬁrst, all intensity values are calculated, and a global value is
marked to be the threshold that is usually calculated based on the histogram of signal intensity in the
image; then, a comparison is made where the pixel values above/less than that are either included or
excluded from the resultant image. The ﬁnal output is then seen as the location of pixels as a region
of interest in an image with the values based on the calculated threshold. One of the most common
and widely used methods for global thresholding is Otsu’s method [55]. Similar to Otsu, Kittler and
Illingworth [56] have introduced a method based on thresholding which can eﬃciently to extract the
text from the background. However, these global thresholding methods work eﬃciently in the case of
a rather simple and decent-quality document but fail to deliver the accurate quality when documents
exhibit degradation such as uneven illumination or noisy background. Figure 12 shows an example of
Otsu global thresholding applied on a degraded document.
 
 
Figure 12. Example of Otsu-based binarization that fails to solve the problem of degradation.


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
12 of 25
4.1.2. Local/Adaptive Thresholding-Based Binarization Methods
Unlike global thresholding methods, where a single threshold is calculated for a whole image,
local/adaptive thresholding phenomenon works based on the calculation of threshold either from
each pixel or a set of pixels, which usually depends on certain pixel limits in a given object of an
image. An image with multiple objects of similar pixels can be categorized into diﬀerent classes and
a set of thresholds can be calculated for each group of pixels locally in the image. One of the ﬁnest
examples of local/adaptive threshold was introduced by Bernsen [57], where a local threshold was
calculated in an image based on the histogram. Here, the image was classiﬁed into groups of pixels
with maximum (max (i, j)) and minimum (min (i, j)) intensities and an estimation of mean value was
calculated, followed by the set threshold based on the local neighborhood window centered at pixel
(i, j). In this case, contrast is also calculated to estimate the diﬀerence between pixels with maximum
(max (i, j)) and minimum (min (i, j)) intensities and a local contrast threshold (for an example k = 20) is
set for both ranges. If the diﬀerence is lower than the threshold (k = 20), the group of pixels with these
values can be set to one class and the remaining to another class, either as foreground or background.
One can assume that since the contrast diﬀerence is calculated with this method, suitability of such
methods is appropriate in the case of bigger contrast values.
For the degraded documents, Niblack introduced an algorithm [58] which estimates a threshold
based on each pixel in an image (usually a rectangular sliding window) and local mean and standard
deviations are taken into consideration. It has been found in the approach proposed by Niblack [58]
that, although the method serves to correctly identify text from a degraded image’s document, it also
suﬀers from background noise. In order to deal with issues faced by Niblack’s method, an improved
method was then proposed by Sauvola and Pietikainen [59] that usually performed better than
Niblack’s method, but often times introduces thin and broken text due to the extensive sliding window
operations. The approach was further investigated by Gatos et al. [60], where a method based on
multi-stage processing was taken into consideration towards developing a document binarization
approach. In this approach, several stages include noise correction and contrast improvement with
the help of a Weiner ﬁlter, followed by performing segmentation for text from the background based
on the method developed by Sauvola and Pietikainen [59]. In the next steps, an intensity analysis
was done to identify the background area in an image, which is further followed by generating the
ﬁnal threshold based on the original and resultant image. This threshold is then utilized for ﬁnal
binarization. Figure 13 shows an example of local thresholding outcomes on a degraded document.
Although this method performs better for document image binarization, the main disadvantage of the
method was that it dealt with only the area with textual information and on the other areas, the method
was not showing eﬃcient results. In order to enhance the capacities of Niblack’s methods, another
method was proposed by Khurshid et al. [61] that can deal with the issue associated with Niblacks’s
method. The proposed method was named Nick’s method. In a more recent study, a novel algorithm
was introduced to solve degraded document image binarization by Khan and Mollah [62]. Here,
background noise removal and document quality enhancement were performed ﬁrst, followed by
applying the variant of Sauvola’s Binarization method, and ultimately performing post-processing to
ﬁnd small areas of connected components in an image and removing the unnecessary components
from the image.
 
Figure 13. Example of adaptive thresholding applied on a degraded document image.


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
13 of 25
4.1.3. Hybrid Thresholding-Based Binarization Methods
In the previous sections of this article, degraded document issues were discussed, followed by the
global and adaptive thresholding approaches used during the binarization process. The process of local
or global thresholding have their own advantages and disadvantages, and one can use the strength of
both local and global thresholding methods in order to provide a better mechanism. This concept has
been seen as an eﬃcient solution, and researchers have come up with methods combining both the
approaches and named the new approach hybrid binarization methods. There are several beneﬁts of
hybrid binarization methods, and one can take into consideration the computation time, ﬂexibility
and eﬃciency of methods, robustness, and accuracies in terms of background and foreground region
extractions. This approach has been considered by Su et al. [63], where diﬀerent thresholding methods
were combined to provide signiﬁcantly better outcomes. In this approach, an improvement was carried
out by combining global (Otsu’s) and adaptive (Sauvola’s methods) for better image binarization.
In the same study, algorithms developed by Gatos’s and Su’s methods were combined along with
combining Lu’s and Su’s methods, which resulted in the best approach. Figure 14 shows an example
of combining binary methods as proposed by Su et al. [63].
Figure 14. Example showing results obtained from Otsu and combined binary approach.
In an attempt made by Sokratis et al. [64], a better result was obtained in the ﬁnal binarization,
where both the local and global approaches were combined. In this method, the algorithm used global
and local threshold as ﬁrst iterative global thresholding, followed by the detection of a noisy area,
and again, the iterative global thresholding was applied locally in each area with noise. An example of
the hybrid algorithm developed by Sokratis [64] is shown in Figure 15.
Figure 15. Example showing the results obtained using hybrid binarization method proposed by
Sokratis et al. [64].
Another study employed the use of a novel hybrid binarization where ensemble-of-expert (EoE)
and grid-based Sauvola’s methods were combined as an entry point to provide better outcomes [65,66].
In general, an EoE framework is developed where the outputs of several methods are taken into
consideration and a conﬁdence map is generated. This conﬁdence map is further utilized to predict


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
14 of 25
the best possible image as an outcome of the general ﬁnal document image in binarized form. In the
next steps, grid-based Sauvola’s technique was employed by adjusting diﬀerent parameters through
grid-based modeling that helps in reducing computation time and memory utilization. As the ﬁnal step,
a texture analysis was performed as post-processing steps that can extract the best possible text based
on the texture mechanism and results in obtaining a better binarization of degraded document images.
In another work proposed by Mitianoudis and Papamarkos [67], a new algorithm was developed for
the improvement in document image binarization and this approach consists of three stages. In the ﬁrst
stage, the background was removed with the help of an iterative median ﬁlter, followed by the second
step, which helps in the separation of misclassiﬁed pixels. For the separation of these misclassiﬁed
pixels, local co-occurrence mapping (LCM) and Gaussian mixture clustering are used, and ﬁnally,
morphological operators are applied for the identiﬁcation and suppression of misclassiﬁed pixels
which, in general, results in better classiﬁcation of text and the background image pixels.
4.1.4. Machine Learning-Based Binarization Methods
Traditional global and local thresholding methods have diﬃculties in the binarization of images
with noisy and non-uniform backgrounds. Machine learning approaches are an alternative way
to overcome these diﬃculties. Many machine learning algorithms have been widely applied to
many document binarization tasks. As an initial work, a neural network-based algorithm was
proposed by Yan and Wu [68] for character extraction from document images. In this approach,
a multilayer neural network is trained with document samples and their related ground truth for
pixel-level document classiﬁcation. The neural network inherently extracts features from pixels
by considering their neighborhood and has the capability to produce adaptive binarization results.
However, this process requires more training data and proper training time. In order to reduce the
training time, a two-stage binarization approach was proposed by Chi et al. [69]. In this method, at ﬁrst,
a region-based binarization stage is applied to the input image to generate the binary output. To do
this, the input image is binarized by using global and local threshold values, which were extracted
from the input image by calculating the histogram of the entire image and pixel level intensity. Then at
the second stage, a neural network is applied on the extracted binary image to distinguish characters
from the background.
The multilayer perceptron is a feed-forward structure with high capability in learning complex
patterns for the various challenging tasks such as cleaning hand-written data [70] and document
binarization [71].
Kefali et al. [72] have proposed feed-forward neural networks for document
binarization in old manuscripts. This method relies on the classiﬁcation scheme using a multilayer
perceptron network. In this approach, the document images with their related ground truth were
fed into a multilayer perceptron network to learn the sample patterns.
At test time, a learned
feed-forward network is applied to the input document image to generate the binarization result.
The experimentation results demonstrated that the proposed Multilayer perceptron (MLP) network is
able to accurately separate foreground information from the degraded documents [73].
Although the artiﬁcial neural network has a high capability in learning complex pattern recognition
tasks, they still have misclassiﬁcation results on degraded document binarization. Fortunately,
deep neural networks, which are a hierarchical NNs, have demonstrated a vast representational capacity
and high-performance rate in various document image binarization tasks [74]. Westphal et al. [74]
have proposed a recurrent neural network model for document image binarization. In this method,
they utilized the grid LSM cells [75] to handle multidimensional input in order to incorporate contextual
information in each step of the binarization process. To do so, they divided the input document image
into non-overlapping blocks of 64 × 64 pixels. These blocks are then considered as an input sequence
for the RNN model. Each block is then read by four separate grid LSTM layers (L1) and the output of
these layers are combined and aligned to produce the mid-level feature sequence. Then, these mid-level
features are fed to two diﬀerent grid LSTM layer (L2), followed by a bi-directional LSTM to produce the
high-level feature map. Then, a full connection layer (L3) has been applied on the high-level feature


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
15 of 25
map to produce the binarization result. Experimental results demonstrated a signiﬁcant increase in
binarization quality. The evaluation process revealed a trade-oﬀbetween binarization quality and
execution time with considering diﬀerent choice for scale factor, footprint size, and the loss function.
In Reference [76], a convolutional auto-encoder decoder model has been proposed for document
image binarization. In this method, a hierarchical layer of convolutions followed by down-sampling
layers were applied on the input image to generate the mid-level representation. In fact, the purpose of
the auto-encoder section is to generate the mid-level representations in order to describe the relationship
between parts of the image that was initially far apart. Then, these mid-level representations were
followed by a series of convolutional plus up-sampling layers to generate the binarization mask.
Once the model is trained, the network output is then ﬁltered by a global threshold to produce the
binarization result. The model was evaluated using diﬀerent strategies and demonstrated remarkable
improvement in document image binarization. It is worthwhile to mention that this approach increased
the best average binarization performance obtained by the state-of-the-art methods from 75.48 to 83.41
in terms of F-measure.
Tensmeyer and Martinez [77] have proposed a fully convolutional neural network for binarization
of both document image and palm leaf manuscript. The model tries to perform document binarization
as a pixel level classiﬁcation task with minimizing the combined P-FM and FM loss functions.
More speciﬁcally, the model takes both grayscale and locally computed relative darkness [77] features
as an input and applies several encoding layers (convolution layer followed by max-poling) to generate
multi-level feature maps. These feature maps, which shows diﬀerent scale information, are then
followed by up-sampled layer to generate the same sized high-level feature maps. These high-level
feature maps are then concatenated and followed by convolutional and sigmoid function to generate
the binarization mask. Finally, by applying a constant threshold on the network, the binarization image
is produced. Experimental results on both document image binarization and palm leaf manuscripts
showed promising results. In addition, the paper states that using additional feature maps such as a
relative darkness feature can increase the model performance on a binarization task.
Ref. [78] proposed a hierarchical deep supervised network (DSN) for document image binarization.
The network architecture follows two main goals. The ﬁrst aim of this network is to use high-level
features to distinguish foreground (text) from the noisy background and the second objective is,
while dealing with noisy background and some other challenges, to preserve foreground (text)
information with high visual quality. In order to do, the network is designed in a way to use diﬀerent
level features for preserving high details of the foreground. The proposed network consists of three
diﬀerent DSNs, in which the ﬁrst DSN contains a low number of convolution layers to generate the
low-level feature maps. The second DSN consists of a slightly deeper structure for producing mid-level
feature maps, and the last DSN is a deep structure for generating high-level feature maps. The input
of these DSNs are the same grayscale images with binary masks. These three DSNs were trained
independently in order to produce foreground maps at three diﬀerent feature levels. Then, these feature
maps are combined to produce the ﬁnal binarization map, which is followed by a threshold value to
produce the binarization result. The experimental result has been done on three public datasets and
demonstrated that the proposed model fully outperforms the state-of-the-art binarization algorithms.
In addition, the authors evaluated the results of the proposed method on diﬀerent types of documents,
eﬀects of data augmentation, and noisy inputs on model performance. Furthermore, the hierarchical
structure of the model demonstrated a signiﬁcant increase in preserving text strokes and provides
excellent visual quality.
5. Performance Metrics and Advanced Document Binarization
Once a binarization method is developed using either of the methods discussed above, the next
step is to measure the eﬃciency in terms of evaluation and comparison. Document image binarization
competition (DIBCO) has provided benchmark evaluation metrics that made use of mathematical
approach to measure the accurateness of obtained results against the ground truth data available.


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
16 of 25
The next section discusses various evaluation metrics and their importance with respect to measuring
the performance of methods for degraded document binarization. The subsequent section then
focuses on the various methods developed to deal with existing degradation types in historical/ancient
documents, and their performance.
5.1. Performance Metrics to Evaluate Binarization Methods
To measure the performance in terms of the eﬃciency of a document binarization method, results
obtained should be evaluated and compared using various metrics; some of the measures suggested
by Gatos et al. [79] and Pratikakis et al. [80] are depicted in Figure 16, and their description is provided
in subsequent sections.
Figure 16. Benchmark performance metrics for document binarization methods.
5.1.1. F-Measure
This criterion of performance measure [79–83] is calculated in terms of recall and precision, where a
combined assessment is carried out to evaluate the overall performance. In this case, harmonics mean
is calculated using both precision and recall function as follows given in Equation (1).
F −measure = 2 × recall × precision
recall + precision
(1)
where, recall and precision are denoted as follows
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
precision =
TP
TP + FP
where, TP denotes true-positive rate, FP represents false-positive rate, and FN represents false-negative values.
5.1.2. Pseudo-F-Measure
Pseudo-F-Measure [84] is another way of measuring performance similarly to F-Measure. However,
it uses the pseudo function in terms of recall and precision rather than their direct functions.
The advantage of using pseudo-recall and pseudo-precision is that they use weighted distance


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
17 of 25
between output images as boundaries of characters in the extracted document and the boundaries
of characters in the ground-truth (GT) image. One other advantage of using pseudo nature of recall
is its consideration towards local stroke width in output images, while pseudo-recall takes into
consideration the local stroke width, and pseudo nature of precision grows to the stroke width of
connected component in ground truth images.
5.1.3. Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR)
Peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) [85] is a measure of the amount of signal in an image with
respect to the amount of noise available. The higher values of PSNR relate to better signal as compared
to noise in image. With respect to document binarization, PSNR provides a measure of the quality of
binarization against ground truth image and it can be measured as given in Equation (2).
PSNR = 10 × log10


MAX 2
I
MSE


(2)
where, mean square error (MSE) can be represented as below.
MSE =
PN
i=1
PM
j=1 (B(i,j) −GT(i,j))2
N × M
5.1.4. Negative Rate Metric (NRM)
The negative rate metric (NRM) [86] is another performance metric given in DIBCO and it
calculates actual mismatches of pixels between the results output and ground truth images based on
pixel by pixel estimations. NRM, in general, is a ratio of total false-negative and total false-positive
pixels in combination and it can be expressed as in Equation (3). In this case, the lower the NRM,
the better quality binarization method
NRM = NRFN + NRFP
2
(3)
where, NRFN and NRFP can be calculated as given below
NRFN =
NFN
NFN + NTP
NRFP =
NFP
NFP + NTN
where, NTP is true positives, NFP is false positives, NTN is true negatives, and NFN is false negatives.
5.1.5. Multi-Classiﬁcation Penalty Metric (MPM)
The misclassiﬁcation penalty metric (MPM) [87] was also used in DIBCO as a performance metric
to evaluate the performance of binarization methods. It can predict object-by-object distances and
mismatches between the resultant output objects and ground truth objects, and it can be presented
as given in Equation (4). For the measure, a low MPM score represents the better quality of the
binarization method.
MPM = MPFN + MPFP
2
(4)
where, MPFN and MPFP can be calculated as given below
MPFN =
PNFN
i=1 di
FN.
D


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
18 of 25
MPFP =
PNFP
j=1 dj
FP.
D
.
5.1.6. Distance Reciprocal Distortion (DRD)
Distance reciprocal distortion [86] is a measure that quantiﬁes the distortions of all pixels that have
been modiﬁed during the binarization process. DRD can be calculated as expressed in Equation (5):
DRD =
PN
k=1 DRDk
NUBN
.
(5)
DRDk is the reciprocal distortion distance and it can be calculated as given in Equation (6). NUBN is
the number of the non-uniform (not all black or white pixels) of the 8 × 8 size in ground truth image.
DRDk =
2
X
i=−2
2
X
j=−2
Bk(x, y) −GTk(i, j)
 × WNM(i, j)
(6)
5.1.7. Average Quality Score
Average quality score [86] is another measure based on the statistics that can provide a global
sign of a method’s eﬃciency in a competitive environment. For a comparison between outcomes
of developed methods against ground truth values, the average quality score can be expressed as
given in Equation (7) below. This method is used to ﬁnd the best methods among the few that are in
comparison, and the lowest accumulated scores represents the best.
Si,j =
N
X
k=1
Ri(j, k)
(7)
where N is the number of evaluation criteria; Ri(j, k) denotes the individual ranking value.
6. Advances in Binarization Methods
In the past, numerous studies have been conducted to deal with document binarization of
handwritten as well as printed documents with diﬀerent types of degradations [88–98]. The degradation
in handwritten and printed historical documents exists in diﬀerent forms, and a detailed discussion on
these issues has been made in Section 2 of this review. Since there are multiple types of degradations
available, our review focuses on the approaches that deal with such degradations and compare the
results obtained. Table 1 below includes diﬀerent studies conducted in the past to deal with various
kinds of degradations, and their outcomes and performances are included to compare the availability
of the best methods in the literature.
The above studies listed in Table 1 are conducted from time to time and each subsequent method
is developed with an intention to improve the results. For the methods developed for degraded
document binarization, performance is measured by evaluating various metrics discussed in the
previous section of this article. Another important aspect of the developed method was to evaluate
their performance on diﬀerent databases available. Mainly, DIBCO document images are extensively
used as a benchmark. Looking at the studies listed in Table 1, several methods have achieved signiﬁcant
performance. However, these methods have been implemented to solve one or a few document
degradation issues discussed in the Section 2 of this article. Some methods are better than others
for a speciﬁc issue, but there is no global method that can deal with all issues related to document
degradation. There is a compelling need for the development of globally accepted method that can
provide signiﬁcantly robust results to deal with diﬀerent kinds of document degradations.


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
19 of 25
Table 1. Comparison of popular document binarization methods for degraded documents.
Studies Conducted
Outcomes/Performance
Niblack, 1985 [59]
Performance is measured in terms of distance calculated from results and ground truth. The distance
was 146.
Li and Lee, 1993 [88]
Average quality score was measured as 0.114 which shows good performance
Sauvola et al., 1997 [89]
Performance is measured in terms of distance calculated from results and ground truth. The distance
was 28.7.
Cheng et al., 1998 [90]
Qualitative measure shows preservation of main features of the component image
Sauvola et al., 2000 [60]
Performance in evaluated based on the ranking/scoring in terms of weighted distance from base pixels.
Overall weighted performance was 93.2% as compared to other methods that results in less than 90%.
Wolf et al., 2002 [91]
Performance is measured in terms of distance calculated from results and ground truth. The distance
was 53.16.
Kavallieratou and Stathis, 2006
[92]
Performance in measured in terms of precision from 43 good-quality images that shows high values as
97.67%
Gatos et al., 2009 [79]
Performance in measured in terms of calculating F-measure and values obtained are 91.9%
Kuo et al., 2010 [92]
Performance in visually measured and results shows competitive visual result compare to Niblack,
Sauvola, Chang, and Otsu methods
Lu et al., 2010 [94]
Performance in measured in terms of calculating F-measure and values obtained are 91.24%
Pai et al., 2010 [95]
Performance is measured in terms of time and recognition rates and the values obtained are:Average
processing time = 0.351; Average recognition rate = 98.22%
Bataineh et al., 2011 [96]
F-mean, PSNR, NRM respectively are 10.5, 6.16 and 89.34
Neves and Mello, 2011 [98]
Values obtained for F-measure, PSNR, NRM, MPM, and GA are 88.7052, 18.7090, 0.0576, 0.6823, and
0.9360, respectively
Su et al., 2011 [64]
F-Measure was calculated and combined results of Otsu’s and Sauvola’s are 86.62% while combined
results of Lu’s method and Su’s are 93.18%
Singh et al., 2011 [99]
Computational Time is measured as ~0.234 Sec. Achieved lowest computational time compared
Niblack, Sauvola, and Bernsen methods
Moghaddam and Cheriet, 2012
[100]
Using the F-measure method automatic mode = 91.57%. Grid-based AdOtsu = 92.01%. Multiscale
grid-based AdOtsu = 92.06%
Howe, 2013 [97]
Performance is measured in terms of F-measure (%) PSNR and DRD are 89.47, 21.80, and 3.44,
respectively.
Kefali et al.2014 [72]
Performance increase according to PSNR, DRD, etc. Metrics.
Ntirogiannis et al. 2014 [101]
F-measure, PSNR, NRM, MPM, p-F-measure (p-FM) and Distance Reciprocal Distortion (DRD), top
performance in most cases.
Hadjadj et al. 2014 [13]
F-measure method = 91.24%
Mitianoudia and Papamarkos,
2015 [67]
Performance in measured by calculating PSNR, MSE, Recall, Precision, F-mean, NRM with the values
obtained as 15.29, 0.0295, 0.8331, 0.9466, 0.8862, and 0.0872, respectively
Al-Khatatneh et al. 2015 [102]
Performance of this method is measured for handwritten and printed documents. For handwritten
document, F-mean and PSNR are 79.63% and 16.56 respectively while for printed document F-mean
and PSNR are 87.6% and 15.94 respectively
Lu et al., 2016 [103]
This method was evaluated in terms of F-mean, PSNR and NRM for both the printed and handwritten
document. For handwritten images, F-mean, PSNR and NRM are 82.82%, 11.86, and 8.76, respectively
while for printed documents values are 87.12%, 10.44, and 8.92, respectively
Calvo-Zaragoza et al. 2017 [76]
Remarkable accuracy rate achieved by the deep Binarization algorithm. 7.9% increase in the accuracy
rate vs. state-of-the-art method
Bataineh et al., 2017 [104]
Measured F-mean, PSNR, NRM and obtained the results as 17.5, 5.14, and 88%, respectively
Tensmeyer et al. 2017 [77]
Performance is measured with various metrics demonstrated an improvement in ﬁnal performance on
two public datasets
Chen et al., 2017 [105]
The performance in measured in terms of PSNR and F-mean that shows the values as 18.2381 and 95.7,
respectively.
Hadjadj et al. 2017 [106]
Performance is measured in terms of F-measure (%) PSNR and DRD are 91.67, 19.96 and 2.76
respectively.
Westphal et al.2018 [74]
Performance increase in terms of PSNR and BRD metrics against state-of-the-art models
Quang Nhat Vo et al. 2018 [78]
Signiﬁcant improvement achieved by evaluating diﬀerent metrics: F-measure 94.4, PSNR 21.4, BRD 1.8
Lu et al. 2018 [107]
Performance in measured in terms of FP, FN, TP, TN, FP + FN, F-measure (%) and NRM and values
obtained are 3180, 8968, 37,013, 747,992, 12,148, 85.90%, and 0.0996 respectively that shows better
performance as compared to Otsu, Niblack and Sauvola methods.
Khitas et al. 2018 [108]
Best Results obtained on BICKLEY DIARY Dataset. Values obtained for the Fm (%) PSNR, NRM and
MPM are 79.11, 13.24, 12.85, and 23.99, respectively. This method has achieved comparatively less
signiﬁcant results for DIBCO database
Xiong et al. 2018 [109]
Superior performance in terms of F-measure, PSNR, NRM, DRD, and MPM that is obtained as 89.967,
18.640, 0.054, 3.757, and 1.979 respectively that shows far better performance
Boudraa et al. 2019 [110]
They used terms of FM (%), FMp (%), DRD and PSNR are 85.08, 89.81, 5.08, and 17.47 respectively


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
20 of 25
7. Conclusions
In this review, diﬀerent document degradation issues are discussed. These issues are associated
with ancient and historical documents, either in handwritten or printed form. The existence of
degradation in handwritten and printed documents exhibits several challenges in developing an
accurate and robust method for document binarization, which ultimately aims at improving the
quality of diﬀerent OCR systems. In this review, diﬀerent binarization techniques are discussed that
are recently on trend. There are so many binarization methods available that can work well with a
particular type of degradation, but a binarization method that can handle any type of degradation is
still left for future work. Binarization is an important step towards the development of a system for
document image recognition and it has a wider application in the current era in which everything is
moving towards digitization. Although several eﬀorts have been made in the past to fulﬁll the main
objective of binarization that involves separation of text from the degraded document background,
there is a compelling need to develop a fast and accurate method of binarization followed by the
OCR system. The futurist approach should focus on the time and accuracy along with the global
method to deal with various kinds of issues associated with prehistoric documents. Moving forward,
one can focus on developing a method that can resolve the issues of degraded document followed by
combining various machine learning-based methods to automatically identify and select the suitable
methods with respect to the degradation available in the document. Towards this, there is also a
need for machine learning-based methods to classify the degradation issues automatically from the
document. In the future, one can improve the quality of degraded document prior to performing
binarization and in doing so, an image enhancement method can certainly help in the future.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.S.; methodology, A.S.; software, A.S.; validation, A.S.; formal
analysis, A.S.; investigation, A.S.; resources, A.S.; data curation, A.S.; writing—original draft preparation, A.S.;
writing—review and editing, A.S., K.O., and M.F.N.; visualization, A.S.; supervision, K.O. and M.F.N.; project
administration, K.O.; funding acquisition, K.O.
Funding: This research was funded by the Ministry of Higher Education in Malaysia by the grant number
FRGS/1/2016/ICT02/UKM/02/1.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Antonacopoulos, A.; Karatzas, D. Document image analysis for World War II personal records. In Proceedings
of the 1st International Workshop on Document Image Analysis for Libraries (DIAL’04), Palo Alto, CA, USA,
23–24 January 2004; pp. 336–341.
2.
Marinai, S.; Marino, E.; Cesarini, F.; Soda, G. A general system for the retrieval of document images from
digital libraries. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Document Image Analysis for Libraries
(DIAL’04), Palo Alto, CA, USA, 23–24 January 2004; pp. 150–173.
3.
Govindaraju, V.; Xue, H. Fast handwriting recognition for indexing historical documents. In Proceedings
of the 1st International Workshop on Document Image Analysis for Libraries, Palo Alto, CA, USA, 23–24
January 2004; pp. 314–320.
4.
Baird, H.S. Diﬃcult and Urgent Open Problems in Document Image Analysis for Libraries. In Proceedings
of the 1st International Workshop on Document Image Analysis for Libraries (DIAL’04), Palo Alto, CA, USA,
23–24 January 2004; pp. 25–32.
5.
Burie, J.-C.; Coustaty, M.; Hadi, S.; Kesiman, M.W.A.; Ogier, J.-M.; Paulus, E.; Sok, K.; Sunarya, I.M.G.; Valy, D.
ICFHR2016 competition on the analysis of handwritten text in images of balinese palm leaf manuscripts.
In Proceedings of the 2016 15th International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR),
Shenzhen, China, 23–26 October 2016; pp. 596–601.
6.
Calvo-Zaragoza, J.; Vigliensoni, G.; Fujinaga, I. Pixel-wise binarization of musical documents with
convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth IAPR International Conference on Machine
Vision Applications, Nagoya, Japan, 8–12 May 2017; pp. 362–365.


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
21 of 25
7.
Dodge, S.; Xu, J.; Stenger, B. Parsing ﬂoor plan images. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth IAPR International
Conference on Machine Vision Applications, Nagoya, Japan, 8–12 May 2017; pp. 358–361.
8.
Sulaiman, A.; Omar, K.; Nasrudin, M.F. A database for degraded Arabic historical manuscripts. In Proceedings
of the 2017 6th International Conference on Electrical Engineering and Informatics (ICEEI), Langkawi,
Malaysia, 25–27 November 2017; pp. 1–6.
9.
Ploem, J.S.; Tanke, H.J. Introduction to Fluorescence Microscopy; Wiley Liss, Inc.: New York, NY, USA, 2001.
10.
Van der Kempen, G.M.P.; van Vliet, L.J.; Verveer, P.J.; Van der Voort, H.T.M. A quantitative comparison of
image restoration methods for confocal microscopy. J. Microsc. 1997, 185, 354–365. [CrossRef]
11.
Mustafa, W.A.; Yazid, H. Image Enhancement Technique on Contrast Variation: A Comprehensive Review.
J. Telecommun. Electron. Comput. Eng. 2017, 9, 199–204.
12.
Mustafa, W.A.; Yazid, H. Illumination and Contrast Correction Strategy using Bilateral Filtering and
Binarization Comparison. J. Telecommun. Electron. Comput. Eng. 2016, 8, 67–73.
13.
Hadjadj, Z.; Meziane, A.; Cheriet, M.; Cherfa, Y. An active contour-based method for image binarization:
Application to degraded historical document images. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR’14), Crete Island, Greece, 1–4 September 2014; pp. 655–660.
14.
Huangy, Y.; Brown, M.S.; Xuy, D. A Framework for Reducing Ink-Bleed in Old Documents. In Proceedings
of the 2008 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Anchorage, AK, USA, 23–28
June 2008.
15.
Leedham, G.; Varma, S.; Patankar, A.; Govindaraju, V. Separating text and background in degraded document
images—A comparison of global thresholding techniques for multi-stage thresholding. In Proceedings of the
8th International Workshop on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition, Niagara-on-the-Lake, ON, Canada,
6–8 August 2002; pp. 244–249.
16.
Hadjadj, Z.; Meziane, A.; Cherfa, Y.; Cheriet, M.; Setitra, I. ISauvola: Improved Sauvola’s algorithm for
document image binarization. In Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference Image Analysis and
Recognition (ICIAR 2016), Póvoa de Varzim, Portugal, 13–15 July 2016; pp. 737–745.
17.
Smigiel, E.; Belaid, A.; Hamza, H. Self-organizing Maps and Ancient Documents. In Proceedings of the 6th
International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems VI, Florence, Italy, 8–10 September 2004; pp. 125–134.
18.
Sehad, A.; Chibani, Y.; Cheriet, M.; Yaddaden, Y. Ancient degraded document image binarization based on
texture features. In Proceedings of the 2013 8th International Symposium on Image and Signal Processing
and Analysis (ISPA), Trieste, Italy, 4–6 September 2013.
19.
Quraishi, M.I.; De, M.; Dhal, K.G.; Mondal, S.; Das, G. A novel hybrid approach to restore historical degraded
documents. In Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Signal Processing
(ISSP), Gujarat, India, 1–2 March 2013; Volume 1, pp. 185–189.
20.
Shirani, K.; Endo, Y.; Kitadai, A.; Inoue, S.; Kurushima, N. Character Shape Restoration of Binarized
Historical Documents by Smoothing via Geodesic Morphology. In Proceedings of the 2013 12th International
Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, Washington, DC, USA, 25–28 August 2013; Volume 12,
pp. 1285–1289.
21.
Xu, L.; Yan, Q.; Xia, Y.; Jia, J. Structure extraction from texture via relative total variation. ACM Trans. Graphics
2012, 31, 139:1–139:10. [CrossRef]
22.
Nagendhar, G.; Rajani, D. China Venkateswarlu SonagiriV.Sridhar. Text Localization in Video Data Using
Discrete Wavelet Transform. Int. J. Innov. Res. Sci. Eng. Technol. 2012, 1, 118–127.
23.
Oakley, J.P.; Satherley, B.L. Improving image quality in poor visibility conditions using a physical model for
degradation. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 1998, 7, 167–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Tan, C.L.; Cao, R.; Shen, P. Restoration of Archival Documents Using a Wavelet Technique. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2002, 24, 1399–1404.
25.
Tan, C.L.; Cao, R.; Shen, P.; Chee, J.; Chang, J. Text extraction from historical handwritten documents by edge
detection. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Control, Automation, Robotics and Vision,
ICARCV2000, Singapore, 5–8 December 2000.
26.
Schechner, Y.Y.; Karpel, N. Clear underwater vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2004), Washington, DC, USA, 27 June–2 July 2004; pp. 536–543.
27.
Kubecka, L.; Jan, J.; Kolar, R. Retrospective illumination correction of retinal images. Int. J. Biomed. Imaging
2010, 2010, 1–10. [CrossRef]


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
22 of 25
28.
Ghabousian, R.; Allahbakhshi, N. Survey of Contrast Enhancement Techniques based on Histogram
Equalization. Int. J. Rev. Life Sci. 2015, 5, 901–908.
29.
Baird, H.S. State of the Art of Document Image Degradation Modelling, invited talk. In Proceedings of the
IAPR 2000 Workshop on Document Analysis Systems, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 10–13 December 2000.
30.
Sharma, G. Cancellation of show-through in duplex scanning. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Image Processing (ICIP), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 10–13 September 2000; Volume 2, pp. 609–612.
31.
Kaur, R.; Kaur, A. An Eﬀective Algorithm for Ink-Bleed through Removal in Document Images. Int. J.
Comput. Sci. Technol. 2011, 2, 330–335.
32.
Dubois, E.; Pathak, A. Reduction of bleed-through in scanned manuscripts documents. In Proceedings of
the IS&T Conference on Image Processing, Image Quality, Image Capture Systems, Montreal, QC, Canada,
22–25 April 2001; pp. 177–180.
33.
Wang, X. Recovery of Blurring Scanned Manuscript Image Based on Wavelets Transform Algorithm.
In Proceedings of the 3rd International Congress on Image and Signal Processing, Yantai, China, 16–18
October 2010. IEEE 978-1-4244-6516-3/10.
34.
Leydier, Y.; LeBourgeois, F.; Emptoz, H. Serialized K-means for adaptative color image segmentation—
Application to Document Images and Others. In Document Analysis Systems VI; DAS 2004. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol 3163; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2004; pp. 252–263.
35.
Wang, W.; Cui, X. A Background Correction Method for Particle Image under Non-uniform Illumination
Conditions. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Signal Processing Systems (ICSPS),
Dalian, China, 5–7 July 2010; pp. 695–699.
36.
Gatos, B.; Pratikakis, I.; Perantonis, S.J. An Adaptive Binarization Technique for Low Quality Historical
Documents. In Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems VI (DAS2004),
Florence, Italy, 8–10 September 2004; pp. 102–113.
37.
Ebrahimi Moghaddam, M.; Jamzad, M. Linear motion blur parameter estimation in noisy images using
fuzzy sets and power. EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process. 2006, 2007, 068985. [CrossRef]
38.
Ebrahimi Moghaddam, M. A mathematical model to estimate out of focus blurs. In Proceedings of the 5th
IEEE International Symposium on Image and Signal Processing and Analysis (ISPA), Istanbul, Turkey, 27–29
September 2007; pp. 278–281. [CrossRef]
39.
Cannon, M.; Hochberg, J.; Kelly, P. QUARC: A Remarkably Eﬀective Method for Increasing the OCR
Accuracy of Degraded Typewritten Documents. In Proceedings of the 1999 Symposium on Document Image
Understanding Technology (SDIUT’99), Annapolis, MD, USA, 14–16 April 1999; pp. 154–158.
40.
Antonacopoulos, A.; Karatzas, D. Semantics-Based Content Extraction in Typewritten Historical Documents.
In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR’05),
Seoul, Korea, 31 August–1 September 2005; pp. 48–53.
41.
Antonacopoulos, A.; Casado Castilla, C. Flexible Text Recovery from Degraded Typewritten Historical
Documents. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR2006),
Hong Kong, China, 20–24 August 2006; pp. 1062–1065.
42.
Pletschacher, S. Representation of Digitized Documents Using Document Speciﬁc Alphabets and Fonts.
In Archiving Conference; Society for Imaging Science and Technology: Springﬁeld, VA, USA, 2008.
43.
Hu, J.; Singh, M.; Mojsilovic, A. Categorization Using Semi-Supervised Clustering. In Proceedings of the
2008 19th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, Tampa, FL, USA, 8–11 December 2008.
44.
Kitadai, A.; Nakagawa, M.; Baba, H.; Watanabe, A. Similarity evaluation and shape feature extraction
for character pattern retrieval to support reading historical documents. In Proceedings of the 2012 10th
IAPR International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems, Queensland, Australia, 27–29 March 2012;
pp. 359–363.
45.
Wu, S.; Lin, W.; Jiang, L.; Xiong, W.; Chen, L.; Ong, S.H. An objective out-of-focus blur measurement.
In Proceedings of the IEEE 5th International Conference on Information, Communications and Signal
Processing ICICS 2005, Bangkok, Thailand, 6–9 December 2005; pp. 334–338.
46.
Shoa, T.; Thomas, G.; Shafai, C.; Shoa, A. Extracting a focused image from several out of focus micromechanical
structure images. In Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), Montreal, QC, Canada, 17–21 May 2004; Volume 3.


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
23 of 25
47.
Vivirito, P.; Battiato, S.; Curti, S.; La Cascia, M.; Pirrone, R. Restoration of out of focus images based on
circle of confusion estimate. In Proceeding of the SPIE 47th Annual Meeting (Applications of Digital Image
Processing XXV Conference), Seattle, WA, USA, 7–11 July 2002; pp. 408–416.
48.
Rooms, F.; Pizurica, A.; Philips, W. Estimating image blur in the wavelet domain. In Proceeding of the IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Orlando, FL, USA, 13–17 May 2002;
Volume 4, pp. 4190–4194.
49.
Lagendijk, R.L.; Biemond, J. Basic Methods for Image Restoration and Identiﬁcation. In Hand Book of Image
and Vedio Processing; Academic Press: Delft, The Netherlands, 2000; Chapter B; pp. 125–140.
50.
Serdouk, Y.; Nemmour, H.; Chibani, Y. New oﬀ-line handwritten signature veriﬁcation method based on
artiﬁcial immune recognition system. Expert Syst. Appl. 2016, 51, 186–194. [CrossRef]
51.
Pratikakis, I.; Zagoris, K.; Barlas, G.; Gatos, B. ICDAR2017 competition on document image binarization
(DIBCO 2017). In Proceedings of the 2017 14th IAPR International Conference on Document Analysis and
Recognition (ICDAR), Kyoto, Japan, 9–15 November 2017; Volume 1, pp. 1395–1403.
52.
Nagasudha, D.; Madhaveelatha; Pratap Reddy, Y. Telugu Document Image Segmentation Methods. Int. J.
Res. Appl. 2014, 1, 76–79.
53.
Shi, Z.; Govindaraju, V. Line Separation for Complex Document Images Using Fuzzy Runlength.
In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Document Image Analysis for Libraries (DIAL’04),
Washington, DC, USA, 23–24 January 2004; pp. 306–312.
54.
Surinta, O.; Chamchong, R. Image segmentation of historical handwriting from palm leaf manuscript.
In Proceedings of the 8th IFIP International Federation for Information Processing, Beijing, China, 19–22
October 2008; Volume 288, pp. 370–375.
55.
Otsu, N. A thresholding selection method from gray-level histogram. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 1979, 9,
62–66. [CrossRef]
56.
Kittler, J.; Illingworth, J. Minimum error thresholding. Pattern Recognit. 1986, 19, 41–47. [CrossRef]
57.
Bernsen, J. Dynamic thresholding of gray-level images. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), Paris, France, 27–31 October 1986; pp. 1251–1255.
58.
Niblack, W. An Introduction to Digital Image Processing; Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ, USA, 1986;
Volume 34.
59.
Sauvola, J.; Pietikainen, M. Adaptive document image binarization. Pattern Recognit. 2000, 33, 225–236.
[CrossRef]
60.
Gatos, B.; Pratikakis, I.; Perantonis, S.J. Adaptive degraded document image binarization. Pattern Recognit.
2006, 39, 317–327. [CrossRef]
61.
Khurshid, K.; Siddiqi, I.; Faure, C.; Vincent, N. Comparison of Niblack inspired Binarization methods for
ancient documents. In Proceedings of the Document Recognition and Retrieval XVI, San Jose, CA, USA,
20–22 January 2009; Volume 7247, p. 72470U.
62.
Pratikakis, I.; Zagoris, K.; Barlas, G.; Gatos, B. ICFHR2016 handwritten document image binarization
contest (H-DIBCO 2016). In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting
Recognition (ICFHR), Shenzhen, China, 23–26 October 2016; pp. 619–623.
63.
Su, B.; Lu, S.; Tan, C.L. Combination of document image binarization techniques. In Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR), Beijing, China, 18–21 September
2011; pp. 22–26.
64.
Sokratis, V.; Kavallieratou, E.; Paredes, R.; Sotiropoulos, K. A Hybrid Binarization Technique for Document
Images. In Learning Structure and Schemas from Documents, Volume 375 of Studies in Computational Intelligence;
Biba, M., Xhafa, F., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany; New York, NY, USA, 2011; pp. 165–179.
65.
Moghaddam, R.F.; Moghaddam, F.F.; Cheriet, M. Unsupervised ensemble of experts (EoE) framework
for automatic binarization of document images. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR), Washington, DC, USA, 25–28 August 2013; pp. 703–707.
66.
Moghaddam, R.F.; Cheriet, M. A multi-scale framework for adaptive binarization of degraded document
images. Pattern Recognit. 2010, 43, 2186–2198. [CrossRef]
67.
Mitianoudis, N.; Papamarkos, N. Document image binarization using local features and Gaussian mixture
modeling. Image Vis. Comput. 2015, 38, 33–51. [CrossRef]
68.
Yan, H.; Wu, J. Character and line extraction from color map images using a multi-layer neural network.
Pattern Recognit. Lett. 1994, 15, 97–103. [CrossRef]


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
24 of 25
69.
Chi, Z.; Wong, K.W. A Two-Stage Binarization Approach for Document Images. In Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Intelligent Multimedia, Video and Speech Processing (ISIMP 2001), Hong Kong,
China, 24 May 2001.
70.
Hidalgo, J.L.; Espana, S.; Castro, M.J.; Pérez, J.A. Enhancement and Cleaning of Handwritten Data by Using
Neural Networks; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2005.
71.
Feng, S. A novel variational model for noise robust document image binarization. Neurocomputing 2019, 325,
288–302. [CrossRef]
72.
Kefali, A.; Sari, T.; Bahi, H. Foreground-background separation by feed-forward neural networks in old
manuscripts. Informatica 2014, 38, 329–339.
73.
Pastor-Pellicer, J.; España-Boquera, S.; Zamora-Martínez, F.; Afzal, M.Z.; Castro-Bleda, M.J. Insights on
the use of convolutional neural networks for document image binarization. In Proceedings of the 13th
International Work-Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (IWANN 2015), Palma de Mallorca, Spain,
10–12 June 2015; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2015; pp. 115–126.
74.
Westphal, F.; Lavesson, N.; Grahn, H. Document image binarization using recurrent neural networks.
In Proceedings of the 2018 13th IAPR International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems (DAS), Vienna,
Austria, 24–27 April 2018; pp. 263–268.
75.
Kalchbrenner, N.; Danihelka, I.; Graves, A. Grid long short-term memory. arXiv 2015, arXiv:1507.01526.
76.
Calvo-Zaragoza, J.; Gallego, A.J. A selectional auto-encoder approach for document image binarization.
arXiv 2017, arXiv:1706.10241.
77.
Tensmeyer, C.; Martinez, T. Document image binarization with fully convolutional neural networks.
In Proceedings of the 2017 14th IAPR International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition
(ICDAR 2017), Kyoto, Japan, 13–15 November 2017; Volume 1, pp. 99–104.
78.
Vo, Q.N.; Kim, S.H.; Yang, H.J.; Lee, G. Binarization of degraded document images based on hierarchical
deep supervised network. Pattern Recognition. 2018, 74, 568–586. [CrossRef]
79.
Gatos, B.; Ntirogiannis, K.; Pratikakis, I. ICDAR 2009 document image binarization contest (DIBCO 2009).
In Proceedings of the 2009 10th International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, Barcelona,
Spain, 26–29 July 2009; pp. 1375–1382.
80.
Ntirogiannis, K.; Gatos, B.; Pratikakis, I. An objective evaluation methodology for handwritten image
document binarization techniques. In Proceedings of the 2008 the Eighth IAPR International Workshop on
Document Analysis Systems, Nara, Japan, 16–19 September 2008; pp. 217–224.
81.
Powers, D.M. Evaluation: From Precision, Recall and F-Measure to ROC, Informedness, Markedness &
Correlation. J. Mach. Learn. Technol. 2011, 2, 37–63.
82.
Sokolova, M.; Lapalme, G. A systematic analysis of performance measures for classiﬁcation tasks.
Inf. Process. Manag. 2009, 45, 427–437. [CrossRef]
83.
Gonzalez, R.C.; Woods, R.E. Digital Image Processing; Addison-Wesley: New York, NY, USA, 1992.
84.
Young, D.P.; Ferryman, J.M. Pets metrics: On-line performance evaluation service. In Proceedings of the 14th
International Conference on Computer Communications and Networks, San Diego, CA, USA, 17–19 October
2005; pp. 317–324.
85.
Lu, H.; Kot, A.C.; Shi, Y.Q. Distance-reciprocal distortion measure for binary document images. IEEE Signal
Process. Lett. 2004, 11, 228–231. [CrossRef]
86.
Ye, P.; Doermann, D. Document image quality assessment: A brief survey. In Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR 2013), Washington, DC, USA,
25–28 August 2013; pp. 723–727.
87.
Yahya, S.R.; Abdullah, S.N.H.S.; Omar, K.; Zakaria, M.S.; Liong, C.Y. Review on image enhancement methods
of old manuscript with the damaged background. In Proceedings of the 2009 International Conference on
Electrical Engineering and Informatics, Selangor, Malaysia, 5–7 August 2009; pp. 62–67.
88.
Li, C.H.; Lee, C.K. Minimum cross entropy thresholding. Pattern Recognit. 1993, 26, 617–625. [CrossRef]
89.
Sauvola, J.; Seppanen, T.; Haapakoski, S.; Pietikainen, M. Adaptive document binarization. In Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition (ICDAR’ 97), Ulm, Germany,
18–20 August 1997.
90.
Cheng, H.D.; Chen, J.R.; Li, J. Threshold selection based on fuzzy c-partition entropy approach.
Pattern Recognit. 1997, 31, 857–870. [CrossRef]


J. Imaging 2019, 5, 48
25 of 25
91.
Wolf, C.; Jolion, J.M.; Chassaing, F. Extraction de texte dans des vidéos: Le cas de la binarisation. Proc. RFIA
2002, 1, 145–152.
92.
Kavallieratou, E.; Stathis, S. Adaptive binarization of historical document images. In Proceedings of the 18th
International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR’ 06), Hong Kong, China, 20–24 August 2006.
93.
Kuo, T.Y.; Lai, Y.Y.; Lo, Y.C. A novel image binarization method using hybrid thresholding. In Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME’ 10), Singapore, 19–23 July 2010.
94.
Lu, S.; Su, B.; Tan, C.L. Document image binarization using background estimation and stroke edges. Int. J.
Doc. Anal. Recognit. 2010, 13, 303–314. [CrossRef]
95.
Pai, Y.T.; Chang, Y.F.; Ruan, S.J. Adaptive thresholding algorithm: Eﬃcient computation technique based on
intelligent block detection for degraded document images. Pattern Recognit. 2010, 43, 3177–3187. [CrossRef]
96.
Bataineh, B.; Abdullah, S.N.H.S.; Omar, K. An adaptive local binarization method for document images
based on a novel thresholding method and dynamic windows. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 2011, 32, 1805–1813.
[CrossRef]
97.
Howe, N. Document binarization with automatic parameter tuning. Int. J. Doc. Anal. Recognit. 2013, 16,
247–258. [CrossRef]
98.
Neves, R.F.P.; Mello, C.A.B. A local thresholding algorithm for images of handwritten historical documents.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Anchorage, AK,
USA, 9–12 October 2011; IEEE Xplore Press: Anchorage, AK, USA, 2011. [CrossRef]
99.
Singh, T.R.; Roy, S.; Singh, O.I.; Sinam, T.; Singh, K. A new local adaptive thresholding technique in
binarization. IJCSI Int. J. Comput. Sci. Issues 2011, 8, 271–277.
100. Moghaddam, R.F.; Cheriet, M. AdOtsu: An adaptive and parameterless generalization of Otsu’s method for
document image binarization. Pattern Recognit. 2012, 45, 2419–2431. [CrossRef]
101. Ntirogiannis, K.; Gatos, B.; Pratikakis, I. A combined approach for the binarization of handwritten document
images. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 2014, 35, 3–15. [CrossRef]
102. AL-Khatatneh, A.M.; Pitchay, S.A.; Al-qudah, M.K. Compound binarization for degraded document images.
ARPN J. Eng. Appl. Sci. 2015, 6608, 594–599.
103. Lu, D.; Huang, X.; Liu, C.; Lin, X.; Zhang, H.; Yan, J. Binarization of degraded document image based on
contrast enhancement. In Proceedings of the 35th Chinese Control Conference, Chengdu, China, 27–29 July
2016; pp. 4894–4899. [CrossRef]
104. Bataineh, B.; Abdullah, S.H.S.; Omar, K. Adaptive binarization method for degraded document images based
on surface contrast variation. Pattern Anal. Appl. 2017, 20, 639. [CrossRef]
105. Chen, Y.; Wang, L. Broken and degraded document images binarization. Neurocomputing 2017, 237, 272–280.
[CrossRef]
106. Hadjadj, Z.; Cheriet, M.; Meziane, A.; Cherfa, Y. A new eﬃcient binarization method: Application to
degraded historical document images. Signal Image Video Process. 2017, 11, 1155–1162. [CrossRef]
107. Lu, D.; Huang, X.; Sui, L. Binarization of degraded document images based on contrast enhancement. Int. J.
Doc. Anal. Recognit. (IJDAR) 2018, 21, 123–135. [CrossRef]
108. Khitas, M.; Ziet, L.; Bouguezel, S. Improved Degraded Document Image Binarization Using Median Filter
for Background Estimation. Elektronika ir Elektrotechnika 2018, 24, 82–87. [CrossRef]
109. Xiong, W.; Xu, J.; Xiong, Z.; Wang, J.; Liu, M. Degraded historical document image binarization using local
features and support vector machine (SVM). Optik 2018, 164, 218–223. [CrossRef]
110. Boudraa, O.; Hidouci, W.K.; Michelucci, D. Degraded Historical Documents Images Binarization Using a
Combination of Enhanced Techniques. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1901.09425.
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
