IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2024
293
Ethics of Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Cultural
Heritage: Opportunities and Challenges
Simona Tiribelli
, Soﬁa Pansoni
, Emanuele Frontoni
, and Benedetta Giovanola
Abstract—Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has witnessed remarkable
advancements in recent years and has signiﬁcantly impacted
various domains, including cultural heritage. Indeed, AI tech-
nologies offer unprecedented capacities to analyze huge amounts
of historical data, enabling researchers and art historians to
uncover precious patterns, connections, and insights that might
otherwise remain elusive. Also, the efﬁciency and accuracy of
AI techniques play a pivotal role in many cultural heritage-
related tasks, such as cataloging and organizing extensive cultural
collections, streamlining the management of heritage resources
for present and future generations. However, the integration of AI
in cultural heritage also brings forth intricate ethical questions.
These span over the issues of authenticity, subjectivity, and
interpretation biases of an AI-empowered, reproduced, and/or
generated artwork up to the legal concerns related to authorship.
However, such issues are mostly undeﬁned and unaddressed in
the scholarship at the intersection on AI, ethics, and cultural
heritage. This paper aims to pave the way to ﬁll such a gap of
context-sensitive ethical issues for AI in cultural heritage. To this
aim, the paper ﬁrst analyzes the main opportunities and beneﬁts
raised by AI in cultural heritage. Then, matching benchmark,
agreed-upon AI ethics principles elaborated in the AI ethics
scholarship in the last decade and relevant to cultural heritage,
it highlights speciﬁc ethical risks that ought to be considered for
the development and deployment of trustworthy AI in and for
cultural heritage. Finally, areas requiring further attention and
work, and actors call to intervene, are identiﬁed to facilitate next
steps for ethics and governance of AI in cultural heritage.
Index Terms—Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), ethics, cultural her-
itage, cultural computing, digital transformation, generative
AI.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HANK to the considerable technological progress of
the last decades, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is gradually
Manuscript received 13 October 2023; revised 18 April 2024 and 8 July
2024; accepted 12 July 2024. Date of current version 16 September 2024. This
work has been funded by the European Union - NextGenerationEU
under the Italian Ministry of University and Research (MUR) National
Innovation Ecosystem under Grant ECS00000041 - VITALITY - CUP
D83C22000710005. The authors also beneﬁtted from the Jean Monnet Chair
(Grant Agreement 101085372) EDIT - Ethics for Inclusive Digital Europe,
co-funded by the European Union. (Simona Tiribelli and Soﬁa Pansoni are
co-ﬁrst authors.) (Corresponding author: Soﬁa Pansoni.)
Simona
Tiribelli
is
with
the
Department
of
Political
Sciences,
Communication and International Relations, University of Macerata, 62100
Macerata, Italy, and also with the Institute for Technology and Global
Health, PathCheck Foundation, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail:
simona.tiribelli@unimc.it).
Soﬁa Pansoni, Emanuele Frontoni, and Benedetta Giovanola are with the
Department of Political Sciences, Communication and International Relations,
University of Macerata, 62100 Macerata, Italy (e-mail: s.pansoni@unimc.it;
emanuele.frontoni@unimc.it; benedetta.giovanola@unimc.it).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TTS.2024.3432407
penetrating various previously unexplored areas, including
creative and cultural sectors (hereinafter: cultural heritage).
This is due to the unprecedented opportunities it showed to
offer in this ﬁeld such as the preservation and restoration of
cultural heritage artifacts, promotion of museum collections
through more engaging cultural experiences, user-tailored
cultural offerings, and the creation of novel art forms through
generative AI, just to mention a few. Indeed, the applica-
tion of AI systems in the cultural heritage sector presents
numerous beneﬁts ranging from the automation of alienating
and repetitive processes, the recovery of precious but lost
cultural assets, as well as more immersive and fulﬁlling
visitor experiences. For instance, Deep Learning (DL) models
can automatically describe works of art, identify the artist,
context, and period of the work, and overcome attribution or
interpretation disputes [1]. Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) further improve cultural heritage restoration processes
by reconstructing missing parts of frescos or paintings [2].
Extended reality (XAI) techniques such as those for aug-
mented (AR) and virtual reality (VR) help introducing new
audiences to art and culture, assisting cultural organizations
in fulﬁlling their educational mandate, and providing a more
inclusive and engaging visitor experience.
The diffusion of AI in the cultural heritage ﬁeld has also
been prompted by the drive for digitization supported by
two main levers. First, an institutional lever: organizations
like the European Commission (EC) and UNESCO stress the
importance of digitizing cultural assets through the promotion
of programs like Europeana [3]. Indeed, cultural digitization
policies seek to democratize culture by promoting accessibility
and interoperability, information sharing, and the protection
of cultural identity. Second, the wide endorsement of the
so-called “adaptation approach” [4] to cultural heritage man-
agement and preservation enhances the cultural sector’s digital
transition.
Indeed, rather than focusing on protecting cultural her-
itage from the harmful effects of human presence (previous
approach,
called
“mitigation
approach”),
the
adaptation
approach contends the preservation of cultural heritage as
ensuring cultural continuity and giving heritage new values
and meanings that depend on changes in society [4]. Therefore,
in this scenario, the digitization of cultural heritage is pro-
moted as an adaptation to the changes in a society that is
continuously evolving, responding to the concept of “cultural
continuity” [4]. Due to the social relevance of cultural assets
and the morally-loaded dimension of cultural heritage, it is
also crucial to consider the ethical and social implications
c⃝2024 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/


294
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2024
that AI technologies may raise when deployed with cultural
heritage. Indeed, AI technologies are never neutral: they
embed directly or indirectly socio-political, economic, and
cultural values and agendas which can improperly affect
cultural heritage. Challenges such as incorrect interpretation,
historical and cultural biases, and economic and cognitive
discrimination can counterbalance beneﬁts provided by AI to
one of the ﬁnest forms of human expression: art and creativity.
Nevertheless, from an ethical and governance standpoint, such
risks and issues concerning the speciﬁc cultural heritage sector
have yet to be explored. This is problematic insofar as to
develop digital transformation policies that maximize beneﬁts
and minimize risks, it is essential to take a sectoral perspective
that complements the generally adopted horizontal view in
AI ethics and governance landscape [5], [6]. Although the
UNESCO Recommendations on the Ethics of AI [7] and the
Ethical Guidelines for a Trustworthy AI [8], proposed by the
high-level expert group on AI (HLEG-AI) set up by the EC,
can help guide the trustworthy use of these technologies in
general, there is still no speciﬁc ethical compass for using AI
in the cultural heritage sector in an ethical and trustworthy-
oriented way.
This paper aims to address such a gap by expanding on the
ﬁrst work of this kind elaborated in the ﬁeld, entitled “Design
of an Ethical Framework for Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Cultural
Heritage” [9], by further developing context-sensitive ethical
considerations, risks, and issues, supported by sector-speciﬁc
cases and examples, and proposing a call to action to pave the
way for the development of effective, sector-speciﬁc guidelines
for trustworthy use of AI in cultural heritage. In particular, this
paper deepens and extends the ethical issues mentioned in the
cited paper focused on ﬁnetuning AI ethics principles for the
cultural heritage sector by mapping onto existing high-level
AI ethics frameworks and principles. This works extrapolates
and elaborates on opportunities and ethical risks stemming
from the use of AI in cultural heritage through the analysis of
sector-speciﬁc ethical principles developed in such a reﬁned
framework. To do so, a cross-search of keywords from the
cultural heritage ﬁeld with those from AI (ML and DL) and
AI ethics was conducted to identify scientiﬁc scholarship of
interest. To identify relevant scholarship, three databases were
used: Web of Science (WoS), Scopus, and EBSCO. WoS was
chosen for its rigorous journal selection procedure, which
is based on publication standards, expert opinions, regular
appearances, and the quality of citation data, making it the
most reliable database. Scopus was selected because it is
the largest database of peer-reviewed literature and EBSCO
was included to ensure comprehensive coverage and that
no relevant articles were overlooked. In selecting reference
articles, we used the following inclusion and exclusion criteria:
1. We included scientiﬁc papers focused on the application
of AI in the cultural sector, speciﬁcally those dealing
with generative AI for artwork production, AI for art-
work restoration, AI for artwork cataloguing, and AI for
creating immersive experiences in the art sector.
2. We included papers addressing AI ethics, as well
as those concerning ethics and aesthetics in cultural
heritage.
3. We included papers and policy documents that provided
ethical recommendations and guidelines on the use
of AI.
4. We excluded articles related to AI technologies that do
not pertain to cultural heritage.
On the relevant papers collected, we conducted a qualitative
content analysis to identify key issues and highlight recurring
themes and ethical considerations. In order to reduce subjec-
tive bias, content analysis was manually and independently
carried out by two authors. The main themes and insights from
the fragmented literature were reinterpreted by applying high-
level AI ethics principles as analytical lenses. This approach
led to the creation of speciﬁc, context-sensitive, and clear ethi-
cal considerations related to AI in cultural heritage, addressing
existing gaps in the literature. These considerations were then
discussed in collaborative sessions to reach a consensus on the
most critical ethical issues in the ﬁeld. Three multidisciplinary
expert workshops were conducted with co-authors and related
partnered stakeholders. A total of 12 experts participated in the
working sessions, coming from the ﬁelds of AI, AI Ethics, and
cultural heritage (including two art curators, two art historians,
and two visual artists). The experts included both academics
and practitioners in order to ensure that the heterogeneity of
professional and academic competencies involved in the ﬁeld
was adequately covered.
From a procedural standpoint, we proceeded as follows. In
the ﬁrst workshop, the draft considerations were presented to
gather stakeholder feedback. This feedback was then utilized
by the authors to reﬁne the ethical aspects and considerations
emerging form the use AI in cultural heritage. During the
second workshop, the reviewed considerations were presented
for a second round of feedback and further integration. The
ﬁnal workshop focused on presenting the main results of the
paper including the ﬁnal framework of ethical considerations
for AI in cultural heritage to the participants. After presenting
the topics the experts were ﬁrst asked for qualitative feedback
through semi-structured questionnaires, which included three
main questions: a) Are the presented ethical considerations for
AI in cultural heritage adequate and exhaustive according to
your background and ﬁeld of (academic and/or professional)
activity? b) If so, what would you add to enrich them based
on your expertise? c) If not, what would you modify and
why? Subsequently, a collective reﬂection was conducted on
the themes and considerations presented, which arose from
content analysis and were re-elaborated through existing high-
level AI ethics guidelines. From an ethical standpoint, the
methodology to elaborate the speciﬁc ethical considerations
before and after the collaborative sessions is detailed as
follows. Alongside the content analysis of the collected papers,
an ethical inquiry was conducted by the authors—comprising
two AI ethicists, an expert in cultural heritage, and an expert in
AI for cultural heritage. This inquiry involved examining the
foremost techniques and applications of AI in cultural heritage,
brainstorming on opportunities, as well as current and potential
ethical risks. The analysis was framed using the primary AI
ethics guidelines to ensure the trustworthy use of AI and the
protection of cultural heritage, also taking into account widely
discussed moral and societal issues in AI ethics and policy.


TIRIBELLI et al.: ETHICS OF AI FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
295
These ethical and policy documents along with scholarly
articles related to ethical and aesthetic issues, such as cultural
heritage’s authenticity, interpretation, and dignity, proved to be
critically important in incorporating the ethical challenges of
the ﬁeld into general ethical frameworks related to AI ethics.
This comprehensive analysis facilitated the design of a call to
action, aimed at proposing sector-speciﬁc guidelines for the
trustworthy use of AI in cultural heritage.
In summary, building on general ethical principles for a
trustworthy AI, this paper highlights the ethical challenges that
arise from the various applications of AI in the ﬁeld of cultural
heritage and identiﬁes areas where further work is needed and
who is called upon to act. The objectives of this work are:
1. Determine the opportunities and beneﬁts brought by the
use of AI in the cultural heritage ﬁeld;
2. Shine a light on the main ethical challenges and harmful
consequences that AI can raise in a cultural and artistic
context;
3. Identify areas of further work and the key players called
into action to ensure ethical use of AI in cultural heritage;
4. Encourage an open discussion and informed debate on
the ethical entailment of AI in cultural heritage, laying the
foundation for the development of guidelines and measures
that promote responsible and informed application of AI in the
ﬁeld, overcoming the generality of national and international
standards by offering sector-speciﬁc ethical guidance.
The paper is structured as follows: Section II presents
the main opportunities and beneﬁts AI brings to cultural
heritage regarding conservation, promotion, accessibility, and
inclusion, drawing insights from the literature on AI for
cultural heritage. Section III explores the ethical risks that
AI arises when applied in the cultural context, matching AI
and cultural heritage ethics concerns. Particularly, speciﬁc
controversial scenarios in which the use of AI can undermine
the preservation, inclusion, and interpretation of cultural her-
itage, including the people, groups, and societies at its core,
are presented and analyzed. Section IV highlights both the
areas requiring further attention toward ethical and trustworthy
design and use of AI in the cultural sphere and the actors
called into their action. Finally, Section V comments on the
results of the discussion proposed in the article and provides
ﬁnal remarks, paving the way for future developments.
II. AI IN CULTURAL HERITAGE: OPPORTUNITIES
AND BENEFITS
AI presents itself as a powerful and innovative technology
whose versatility and applicability in different contexts and
sectors allow it to fascinate and conquer the ﬁeld of cul-
tural heritage. Although AI has only become the focus of
public debate in recent years, applying Machine Learning,
Deep Learning, and Computer Vision technologies in cultural
heritage preservation and promotion has been practiced for
nearly a decade. This cutting-edge technology provides three
key opportunities, deeply explored in this section: accessibility
and inclusion, cultural heritage preservation, and novel forms
of creative production.
A. Increased Accessibility and Inclusion
Under their educational mission, museums must ensure the
accessibility of their spaces and collections to people with
disabilities, such as the physically or the visually impaired. In
addition, the United Nations (UN) Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities sets forth the obligation of the
adhering countries to “recognize the right of persons with
disabilities to take part on an equal basis with others in
cultural life” [10, art.30, p.22]. One of the categories of people
most disadvantaged in the enjoyment of art is the visually
impaired. The main problems of accessibility for visually
impaired people belong to two main categories: 1. problems
of physical mobility and the consequent inability to move
independently in a museum space, and 2. problems related to
the lack of non-visual alternatives to artwork [11]. Although it
is imperative to make content accessible to all, most museums
and galleries’ sight-centric design (which privileges sight over
other senses) excludes people with visual impairments [12].
Augmented reality (AR) is a great tool to face these problems.
Different solutions have been developed to ensure inclusive-
ness in cultural enjoyment, and many of these technologies
can be installed on mobile devices making their use affordable
for everyone. Through mobile applications empowered by
AR technologies that can provide interactive descriptions of
the artwork and 2D visual access, cultural content can be
improved, overcoming the obstacles of using tools that are
difﬁcult for visually impaired people to use, such as audio
guides [13]. In addition, through AR-based mobile applica-
tions, visually impaired visitors can independently explore
exhibits and places of cultural interest safely and enjoy real-
time descriptions. Through technologies such as image sensing
and tracking, location, and simultaneous mapping, physical
spaces can be augmented both visually as well as through
other sensory modalities such as touch and hearing [14].
Auditory virtual tags afﬁxed to objects in museum spaces can
be activated based on the proximity between the object and the
user’s mobile device, providing users with information related
to the context and characteristics of the work [15].
As for people with physical disabilities, another way to
ensure their accessibility to museum content is by using VR to
create a virtual environment and tours. Virtual environments
allow navigating within a space and interacting with people
in different places [16]. People with disabilities can encounter
cultural experiences in VR and AR settings, improving the
impression of “being there” or “feeling present” in a given
space [16]. Different studies show that virtual visits are an
excellent tool for people with disabilities allowing them to
access and appreciate works of art [17]. In this context,
terriﬁc and yet unexplored opportunities can be offered by the
virtual spaces that can provide the possibility of entering and
visiting virtual galleries in a realistic and highly immersive
way without having to travel miles to reach a physical museum
or to enjoy an art exhibition or archaeological site.
Another opportunity presented by AI solutions is the cre-
ation of engaging cultural experiences that support audience
development and promotional goals by enabling the creation of
content and activities that can be customized to different types


296
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2024
of visitors. Immersive technologies can signiﬁcantly enhance
the visitor experience by engaging users in the museum envi-
ronment. With speech recognition technology and interactive
question-and-answer apps combining AR and VR, visitors can
interact with virtual characters that can explain and interpret
cultural content that emotionally engages them [18]. In this
approach, engaging and interactive storytelling can overcome
those communication barriers that often prevent art from rais-
ing the audience’s interest. Using automated planning systems,
AI can also create personalized visit itineraries that consider
users’ preferences. Cultural trails can be customized to suit
the preferences and interests of tourists using multimedia tools
like a user-friendly app. These systems may increase interest in
and demand for museum exhibits and cultural activities. Based
on the information entered, the planner develops a tailored
path and suggests it to the users, selecting artworks that match
their preferences and excluding those that do not [19].
Another beneﬁt AI can bring to the cultural sector, in
improving accessibility, is the automatic description and
interpretation of artworks. AI algorithms can automatically
describe, and catalog works of art. In this way, through
high-performance computing (HPC), trained AI models, can
signiﬁcantly improve the information on cultural heritage [20].
To achieve this, tens of thousands of images and text descrip-
tions are used to train a DL model for automatic data labelling.
As a result, it is possible to automatically generate descriptions
that consider culture, symbolism, and historical context for
thousands of cultural heritage archives. The richness of the
annotation enables a better browsing experience in collections
catalogs and better access to collections. These results can
support education, art, and tourism but also scholarly and
research activities.
These applications bring signiﬁcant social beneﬁts: through
greater inclusion and accessibility, it is possible to achieve
greater democratization of art and culture, leading to a
more culturally and artistically informed, sensitive, and aware
society.
B. Improved Preservation Practices
Natural and human-made challenges such as climate change,
natural disasters, conﬂict, and vandalism have made preserving
tangible cultural heritage an increasingly complex challenge
to face in the last decades. In this scenario, AI-based techno-
logical developments have completely changed how cultural
heritage can be preserved and documented, addressing and
mitigating damages while improving security measures. As
Ocón states “Digitalization can also provide a sort of memory
insurance policy for cultural heritage, in the event of a total
or partial destruction, or substantial degradation” [21]. There
are many examples of how, thanks to 3D modeling techniques,
destroyed monuments have been revived. AI technologies, for
instance, brought back to life Buddhas, which were destroyed
in Afghan Bamiyan Valley in 2001, as holographic stat-
ues [21]. In a similar vein, the UNESCO-sponsored initiative
“Revive the Spirit of Mosul” has been successful in using 3D
modeling to restore monuments that were destroyed during
the numerous conﬂicts that decimated the millennium-old city
of Mosul [21]. Modern 3D scanning tools and AI algorithms
allowed for the mapping of the damage and the planning of
the reconstruction of Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris after
the catastrophic ﬁre that occurred there in 2019 [21]. In this
regard, another great opportunity AI offers to the art ﬁeld is
the capacity to determine the authorship of a painting based
on various stylistic characteristics. This makes it possible to
solve problems of attribution of artworks avoiding the distri-
bution of paintings with false authorship on the art market.
Thanks to DL-based technologies, it is possible to identify a
piece’s author, context, and period, addressing attribution and
interpretation disputes. Art specialists often employ attribution
techniques that rely on identifying the unique visual character-
istics of paintings, honing their skills by analyzing numerous
artworks. In a similar vein, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) are adept at detecting the distinct qualities that capture
an artist’s unique style. By training CNNs on a large digital
collection of art, these networks can discern artist-speciﬁc
visual traits crucial for reliable attribution [23]. While object
recognition might seem straightforward to humans, pinpoint-
ing an artist’s style and correctly attributing artworks remains
a complex task, even for experts. In contrast, deep learning
algorithms have shown remarkable accuracy in attributing
art quickly and effectively. This technology signiﬁcantly aids
decision-making in museums, auction houses, and among art
collectors, providing a robust means to verify the authenticity
of artworks in the market.
Another problem that often arises in the restoration of works
of art is the complete reconstruction of the artwork when some
parts are missing or signiﬁcantly damaged. In this sense, AI
has tremendously aided the study of cultural heritage, notably
in automatic object recognition and the translation of ancient
languages, where DL algorithms can be used to ﬁll in the gaps
in damaged or only partially restored old texts [24]. Moreover,
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and DL algorithms
broadly have recreated damaged images. These AI models
could help conservators and restorers recover frescoes when
pieces are damaged or missing [25].
AI technologies can also evaluate and understand vast
quantities of geospatial and historical data, providing crucial
details about cultural heritage sites and artifacts [26]. This
process can offer information for conservation and mainte-
nance efforts aiding decision-making processes in this regard.
AI systems can also assist in creating digital cultural heritage
models, supporting accurate simulations and reconstructions.
For example, in detecting and mapping archaeological sites
and other cultural heritage assets, ML techniques are utilized
to analyze and interpret the 3D point cloud data produced
by LiDAR sensors [27], [28]. Additionally, AI can automate
3D digitization processes, making the procedure time and cost
effective, and allowing cultural heritage to be more widely
accessible [29]. Indeed, AI-powered virtual reconstruction
and restoration enable precise and thorough recreations of
historical sites and artifacts, providing visitors and researchers
with immersive experiences. AI can contribute to the preser-
vation and transmission of cultural heritage by also offering
innovative strategies for protecting our shared history and
cultural heritage for future generations [30]. The structural


TIRIBELLI et al.: ETHICS OF AI FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
297
condition of cultural heritage can also be tracked using AI-
based visual inspection systems, in which ML algorithms
analyze visual data from sensors and cameras to identify and
detect potential structural damage or deterioration [31] quickly
and accurately. In this way, AI could track and detect changes
to cultural heritage sites and artifacts for damage prevention
and in-time intervention. AI-assisted risk and emergency
scenario prediction can help to safeguard cultural heritage
from upcoming catastrophes like natural disasters [32] or
vandalism [33]. AI can also help recover historical property,
enabling the identiﬁcation and restitution of stolen or illegally
sold cultural heritage items. In addition, AI can be employed
for online crime heritage detection to spot and stop unlawful
trading in cultural heritage artifacts [34].
C. Novel Forms of Creative Production
Thanks to generative AI based on GANs, it is now possible
to create pieces of painting, music, or literary text using AI. In
this way, artists can be assisted in creating new creative lan-
guages, leading to a collaborative relationship between AI and
human agency and creativity. With the advent of generative AI
platforms such as those from OpenAI, Mistral, Google AI, and
Anthropic, pretrained algorithms and foundation models that
can create creative and artistic content are becoming easily
accessible to everyone. With tools such as DALL-E, Claude
AI, Suno, Character.ai, Midjourney, or SORA, it is possible
to create and conceptualize a work of art through a prompt,
which is a text-based input describing the image to be created.
While many criticize generative AI tools as automation tool
of artistic production, more optimistic perspectives argue that
they might create an opportunity rather than a threat [35].
The invention of photography was also criticized at its origin
as the end of visual art. However, history has demonstrated that
this was not the case: photography has offered the opportunity
to move on to new artistic languages that have broken away
from realism [35]. In this context, AI can be considered a new
technological medium that can shape, enrich, and expand the
artistic languages we knew to date.
III. AI IN CULTURAL HERITAGE: ETHICAL
CHALLENGES AND RISKS
Despite the tremendous opportunities AI offers the cultural
sector, it can simultaneously pose several ethical challenges
and risks. In this section, we identify at least eight critical
ethical risks that should be considered for the responsible
and trustworthy use of AI in cultural heritage. These risks
were identiﬁed by analyzing the applications of AI in cultural
heritage through ethical lenses resulting mainly from the
reasoned matching of the ICOM Code of Ethics (a reference
text that sets standards for the practice of museum profession-
als) [36], the EU ethical guidelines for trustworthy AI [8], the
Recommendation on the Ethics of Artiﬁcial Intelligence [7]
promoted by UNESCO, and a preliminary sector-speciﬁc
framework designed for the ethical use of AI in cultural
heritage [9].
A. Undermined Authenticity
Various cultural organizations worldwide, including the
International Council of Museums (ICOM), the International
Federation
of
Library
Associations
(IFLA),
and
the
International Council of Archives (ICA), have codes of
ethics that aim to guarantee authenticity. UNESCO also fully
promotes authenticity through the notion of “Outstanding
Universal Value”, which is the threshold for including a
cultural heritage property in the World Heritage List [37].
Despite that, Nakonieczna and Szczepa´nski (2023) deﬁned
authenticity as “an ephemeral phenomenon” [37]. They state
that “depending on the ideology, the perception of authenticity
can be quite diversiﬁed, even mutually exclusive” [37].
Regarding the digitization of cultural heritage, authenticity
is a hotly contested topic. When referring to “authenticity”,
the original artwork’s substance is emphasized as the sole
source of veriﬁable historical evidence and a connection to the
artist [38]. Some contend that interactive 3D reproduction does
not accurately depict the original and may even dehumanize
cultural heritage [39]. Various authors have long debated and
addressed the issue of art authenticity. Indeed, it is frequently
believed that a piece of art is unique and capable of inspiring
an “aura” that is, a poetic and political gaze in the observer,
and that any reproduction will not be able to substitute for
the physical experience of the “hic et nunc” (here and now
feeling) [40]. While AI provides new tools to make art more
engaging through AR and VR, one can contend that since
VR is a medium to access art, it can weaken or decrease
the authenticity of the original artistic space and experience.
Replacing physical with virtual contact could lead to a sort
of communicative and relational impoverishment that would
jeopardize the fulﬁllment of the educational goals of cultural
heritage. Those who claim such risk maintain that museum
experiences require personal, social, relational, or strictly
physical interaction to increase heritage objects and sites’
intrinsic enjoyment and engagement [16]. In this sense it is
critical that VR experiences, and thus the AI they depend
on for dynamic content generation and optimization, are
designed to be highly believable, facilitating interaction and
navigability [41]. Some of these issues arise in the case of
real-time rendering, a crucial aspect of many VR experiences
that impose limitations on the complexity and richness of
visual details. This constraint can affect artists who rely
on intricate details to convey their artistic vision. A digital
sculptor creating highly detailed virtual sculptures may face
compromises in visual ﬁdelity due to the real-time rendering
demands of VR, potentially impacting the level of detail and
nuance in the ﬁnal piece. In this way, the authenticity of the
artwork experience and the message they convey risk being
compromised.
The problem of authenticity also affects AI-generated
works. If the authenticity of a work of art is based on a
poetic relationship between the viewer and the artist, the
question naturally arises as to whether this relationship can
also be established with a machine-generated piece based on
yet-existing artistic training images. Since the authenticity
of a work of art is closely linked with its authorship and


298
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2024
provenance, a few key questions arise and will have to be
answered though valid arguments in the case of AI-generated
art in the near future: Who is the author? Can that work,
created by a machine, be said to be authentic?
Another challenge with regard to authenticity is posed by
AI automated planning systems that create cultural offerings
tailored to consumer tastes and preferences, therefore under-
mining the educational task of cultural institutions. By offering
just what appeals to audiences (popular contents), while
potentially omitting less popular and mainstreaming artworks,
this technology can diminish the provocative and critical power
of the arts, it could also undermine the heterogeneity in
creative production leading to more impactful and greater
aesthetic standardization.
To prevent this challenge, artists must avoid ceding to
content impoverishment actions in the light of a simpler, more
engaging, and accessible experience, by working on preserving
their intended narrative and meaning while generating viewer
engagement. This entails a careful ethical consideration to
not let the emphasis on creating an engaging and often
standardized or mainstream experience compromise or dilute
the unorthodox, unexpected, and sometimes disturbing effect
very often invaluably connoting or characterizing artistic
expressions.
In summary, preserving cultural heritage authenticity is
a signiﬁcant and necessary ethical problem to address. As
Nakonieczna & Szczepa´nski (2023) point out, the concept of
“Authenticity of cultural heritage” has evolved over time and
now needs a paradigm shift, a redeﬁnition of this concept, tak-
ing into account the new technologies that are revolutionizing
how the artistic experience is enjoyed: they do not mediate it
anymore, while deeply inﬂuence and shape it [37]. To the best
of our knowledge, no current AI ethics framework considers
this requirement to be of utmost signiﬁcance. Therefore, it is
today of paramount importance to deﬁne the authenticity of a
work of art (what it means and requires to be ensured) and
include this core ethical value and principle within a sector-
speciﬁc ethical framework for ethical AI in cultural heritage.
B. Inaccurate Interpretation of the Artwork
The issue of inaccurate automatic interpretation of the
artwork ﬁts into broader ethical framework principles, partic-
ularly in the issue related to the accountability of AI systems.
According to UNESCO’s Recommendation on AI ethics [7],
AI systems ought to incorporate methods for oversight, impact
assessment, veriﬁcation, and due diligence to maintain AI
accountability. For this reason, a preliminary sector-speciﬁc
Ethical Framework entails reliability as a fundamental ethical
principle for using AI in the cultural heritage context [9].
The latter framework stresses how the ethical requirement of
Human Agency and Oversight (see HLEG-AI 201) becomes
crucial to address accountability of AI in cultural heritage,
which always requires the cultural heritage expert in the loop.
In particular, [9] argues how human agency can tackle one of
the main obstacles to using AI for the automatic description
and cataloging of works: the quality and quantity of data
required and available to train AI models [20]. Training an
automatic captioning model requires a dataset with corre-
sponding images and descriptions. Cultural heritage metadata
usually does not refer to the visual content of the artwork that,
by contrast, is crucial to formulate a complete analysis of the
work. In addition, a highly symbolic component characterizes
a work of art: the same element may have different meanings
depending on the artistic movement to which it belongs or
the historical period of reference. For this reason, the dataset’s
annotation phase is of paramount importance. Thus, if the
descriptions used to train the model are incomplete, there is a
risk of transmitting an inaccurate description to the end user.
Consequently, omitting critical artwork features might change
its social, cultural, and artistic meaning. An example of a
risk that may occur is that an AI algorithm may misinterpret
the symbolism in a painting, associating an ordinary object
with a particular meaning that the artist does not intend—for
instance, interpreting a butterﬂy as a symbol of freedom when
the artist intended it to represent fragility. Another problem
may arise in the automatic interpretation of conceptual art,
which often relies on ideas and contexts rather than traditional
artistic elements. AI may struggle to interpret and appreciate
an artwork’s conceptual nature, resulting in a superﬁcial
analysis that misses the deeper meaning. For this reason, to
be reliable, the development of automatic captioning systems
for describing works of art requires extensive annotation of
datasets related to archives and catalogs, which can be done
only and exclusively by domain experts such as art historians,
archaeologists, linguists, and philologists. Here the role of
human agency and oversight as a requirement becomes clearer.
It is worth specifying that the choice of such experts is also
important. The lack of representation and cultural diversity
(also in terms of artistic inﬂuences, backgrounds, ethnicity,
age, and gender) might lead to another kind of risk and ethical
challenges, belonging to the category of biased interpretation.
C. Biased Interpretation
Diversity and nondiscrimination are two fundamental ethical
requirements outlined in the UNESCO [7] recommendations
for using AI and the EC Guidelines for Trustworthy AI [8].
These high-level requirements arise from the general AI ethics
principle of justice and fairness, present in almost every
framework developed to date for AI [6]. These requirements
must be considered when applying AI in cultural heritage,
for example, to automatically interpreted works, in order to
avoid the risk of culturally limited or biased interpretations.
Although experts often try to deﬁne objective criteria for
reading works of art, interpretations often vary according to
the cultural and epistemic background of the art critics.
One might question the importance of interpretation. Indeed,
according to Susan Sontag “Interpretation is not an absolute
value [· · · ] Interpretation must itself be evaluated, within a
historical view of human consciousness. In some cultural
contexts, interpretation is a liberating act [· · · ]. In other cul-
tural contexts, it is reactionary, impertinent, cowardly, stiﬂing”
[42, p. 4]. In this deﬁnition of interpretation, highly subjective
aspects indeed emerge; aspects that vary according to diverse
personal encounters people can have with art. For this reason,


TIRIBELLI et al.: ETHICS OF AI FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
299
in criticism, as in art, there are many currents of thought, each
with its own particularities and different readings.
When the interpretation of a work is made through AI
models, the choice inevitably falls on the most dominant
and accessible via data reading of the work (informativeness
bias). In this way, only the most popular interpretation is
transmitted and communicated, often leading to a cultural-
historical bias and the marginalization of less dominant,
but no less signiﬁcant, interpretations and hence understand-
ing [43]. This happen especially in interpreting the cultural
heritage of minorities such as indigenous communities or
communities with a colonial heritage, which tend to be vul-
nerable to be improperly inﬂuenced and read by ethnocentric,
Western-centric lenses [44]. In the attempts to assimilate
indigenous knowledge and spirituality into a “Western” world-
view interpreting cultural heritage metadata in such a way risk
undermining local cultures’ veracity [45]. Particularly, this risk
mainly occurs when AI models are trained on datasets that
reﬂect biases prevalent in historical art collections or among
critics. This challenge can lead to a skewed understanding
of art history, reinforcing stereotypes, as well as overlooking
contributions from marginalized groups. Also, there is a risk
of underrepresentation of diverse perspectives: If the training
data lacks diversity in terms of artists’ backgrounds, styles, or
cultural inﬂuences, the AI model may struggle to interpret art-
works that deviate from the dominant narratives present in the
training data. High-level ethical principles and requirements of
diversity, fairness, and nondiscrimination are violated in these
situations [7], [8]. The automatic interpretation of works thus
runs the risk of failing to reﬂect minorities while ﬂattening
multiple readings of a work. Therefore, the inability of AI to
reﬂect all the different and myriad interpretations of a work
become a relevant challenge to consider.
In this context, as some authors have started to observe, it is
critically important to deeply expand and revise (decolonize)
core AI ethics principles by considering also other cultures
besides the Western to develop truly representative ethical
systems of values to embed in AI [45]. The ethical frameworks
characterized by principles and values that guide AI ethics run
the risk of being biased by the vision of Western moral philos-
ophy; that is, they risk failing to consider ethical perspectives
belonging to other, more marginalized, and vulnerable cultures
(e.g., Ubuntu ethics in Sub-Saharan Africa), which deserve
equal attention for a globally sensitive AI ethics discourse [46].
Similarly, the application of AI in cultural heritage faces the
risk of becoming a channel for perpetuating patterns of colo-
nialism. For this reason, the ethics of AI for cultural heritage
must move beyond the widely acknowledged risks such as
privacy and autonomy issues to consider AI’s role through
cultural heritage in nurturing forms of colonialism [47]. In
this scenario, it is possible to identify two major ethical
issues: The ﬁrst concerns risk of cultural identity erasure of
minorities resulting from the failure to consider cultural her-
itage’s multiple cultural and semantic facets. Data abstraction
processes, i.e., the ability to automatically provide a semantic
characterization of data [48], can cause this risk, implementing
data simpliﬁcation procedures and subsequent generalization
of details. The second issue entails that a globally sensitive
and inclusive ethics of AI for cultural heritage requires the
decolonization of cultural consumption. That is, it is necessary
to conceive cultural heritage as something created by and for
the target communities, and consequently, it is only through
their reading, customs, and traditions that it must be interpreted
and enjoyed. On the contrary, if this effort is missing, the
application of AI will lead to a cultural heritage’s innovative
fruition. Still, only in terms of the medium and not in terms of
content: in fact, it will only replicate the patterns of cultural
reproduction, appropriation, and exploitation already in place.
D. Digitization as an Excuse to Destruction
Another principle common to the EC guidelines and
UNESCO recommendations is sustainability of AI [7], [8],
intended as societal and environmental wellbeing. That is,
there is a need for AI to consider the protection of the
environment, the natural ecosystem, and biodiversity and
contribute to more just and fair societies [9]. For this reason,
AI should be used in a way that succeeds in reducing its
energy consumption, which is often directly proportional to its
performance levels. Also, it should be used to support innova-
tive reconstruction and restoration systems. This principle aims
to limit the risk associated with digitization and subsequent
virtual reproduction of artworks: the possibility that digital
representation will supersede the signiﬁcance of the physical
one, justifying the destruction of certain physical cultural
heritage sites and artifacts that are of historical and cultural
signiﬁcance to local communities while not on the World
Heritage List –therefore not protected by relevant legislation.
For example, accurate 3D modeling and reproductions that
allow digital access to cultural heritage can justify interven-
tions to demolish it to construct new structures for purely
economic and commercial purposes. In the face of this risk,
Ocón [21] examines the challenges that Southeast Asian cities
faced in balancing the preservation of unprotected cultural
heritage with urban development needs. In particular, the
author highlights how digital archiving, 3D modeling, and VR
have been used to document and virtually preserve precarious
sites such as The Bukit Brown Cemetery in Singapore and the
Pekeliling Flats and A&W Petaling Jaya in Malaysia before
they were altered or demolished.
While these technologies have been crucial for conserving
these sites, it is important to also consider the risks of
relying solely on digital preservation. Using digital methods
as justiﬁcation for the physical destruction of cultural heritage
could result in the loss of tangible elements that often hold
signiﬁcant identity value for the reference group.
In addition, the application of AI in cultural heritage entails
signiﬁcant human and environmental costs that frequently
conﬂict with cultural heritage’s social and ecological sustain-
ability goals [45]. For example, the development of AI systems
requires the occupancy of space (e.g., data centers), techno-
logical infrastructure, and environmental resources, which can
adversely affect areas that are crucial for the preservation and
well-being of speciﬁc historical, natural and cultural sites,
potentially degrading these environments and diminishing their
historical and cultural value.


300
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2024
E. Socio-Economic and Cognitive Accessibility
Building on the core AI ethics principle of justice and
fairness, the sector-speciﬁc framework developed for using
AI in the cultural heritage context recognizes accessibility
as a fundamental principle [9]. Indeed, it is essential to
ensure equal possibilities of access to and enjoyment of these
technologies independently of different kinds of institutions
and audiences. As echoed in the UNESCO recommendations,
spreading awareness and literacy of these technologies to
domain experts and target audiences is crucial to making these
technologies accessible to all [7].
To further address these challenges, it is imperative to also
consider the provision of adequate economic and educational
resources. Developing AI models to promote and sustain
cultural heritage requires signiﬁcant economic investment and
mainly specialized human resources [5]. As a result, there is
a risk of disparities between larger and wealthier institutions
that can afford to make signiﬁcant investments and smaller
institutions with niche productions that cannot bear the high
costs. Similarly, because of the high investment required
to develop such technologies, there is a risk that cultural
heritage of economically weaker countries will be excluded
from the digitization process [49]. The risk of unfairness and
discrimination related to the need for signiﬁcant economic
resources to develop AI systems, occurs when only wealthier
and more developed countries can afford AI technologies
to preserve and restore their cultural heritage. In contrast,
economically disadvantaged countries are likely to be left
behind and ﬁnd the process of reconstruction, preservation and
accessibility improvement challenging to implement, leading
to a distinction between “A-list cultural heritages” and “B-list
cultural heritages”
Another problem is the cognitive accessibility of digital con-
tent. Digitization allows better access to cultural heritage, even
for people with physical disabilities. For people with cognitive
disabilities, there is a risk that these processes will marginalize
them even more [50]. Indeed, it is essential to ensure that the
digitization of cultural heritage does not result as an end in
itself, but that digitalized artworks, services, and experiences
are also cognitively accessible and enjoyable by the target
audience. For this reason, once access to digital collections has
been enabled or immersive experiences have been developed
through AR and VR, it is also essential to ensure that these
products and content are consciously consumed. To this end, it
is essential to design these products considering the nature and
source of potential users’ cognitive vulnerabilities to develop
interfaces that compensate for, rather than exacerbate, such
imbalances or diversities (e.g., neurodiversity).
For instance, the target audience may lack the necessary
training to utilize AI technologies appropriately, which creates
an additional barrier. This risk is especially signiﬁcant when
enhancing the cultural heritage experience by making it more
personalized and inclusive. Without a proper understanding of
how to interact with AI-driven tools, users may feel frustrated,
incapable, or confused, and even excluded by design. It may
also ruin their overall experience and potentially discourage
them from further exploring AI-enhanced cultural content.
Additionally, AI applications often require understanding com-
plex interfaces or interpreting AI-generated recommendations.
Untrained users may ﬁnd these aspects challenging, leading to
misuse or underutilize AI tools. Furthermore, without proper
or personalized training, people with disabilities or older
adults may ﬁnd it particularly difﬁcult to use AI technologies,
limiting their access to art and cultural education. These are
just a few examples of risks that can occur. Therefore, as
outlined in the UNESCO recommendations, the development
of AI systems must be accompanied by processes of education
and literacy about how these technologies work by improving
their accessibility.
F. Universal Access and Top-Down Approach
One of the sector-speciﬁc principles developed for AI in cul-
tural heritage [9] is meaningful participation. This prescribes
that the use of AI technologies should be implemented in
an inclusive manner through a bottom-up approach involving
different stakeholders and competencies [9].
Many contend that cultural heritage digitization is frequently
adopted top-down and as a means rather than an aim, omitting
several vital aspects of the community’s needs. As Taylor
and Gibson (2016) argue “certain digitization activities can
subtly reinforce non-democratic structures” [51]. For example,
this might be the case of digitizing the cultural heritage of
indigenous communities. This would ask for both hearing and
centering their voices and considering the consequences that
such operation (i.e., the resulting free access to that heritage)
would bring to the target community. The target communities
conceive some cultural sites as sacred or symbolic, and their
access is allowed only to people of a speciﬁc gender or age.
For this reason, there is a risk that the digital reproduction of
a cultural heritage site and its resulting free access will not
align with the worldview of the target communities. Neglecting
communities’ needs and values reinforces different forms of
discrimination [39]. Consequently, these risks are at odds with
the commitment of cultural institutions to present a variety
of perspectives and to promote cultural diversity and mutual
dialogue between cultures [39], as well as with the ethical
principles of fairness, equity and nondiscrimination promoted
by the general EU and UNESCO recommendations [7], [8].
Moreover, the involvement of communities’ members might
help overcome the risk of excluding them from beneﬁting from
AI’s economic and cultural opportunity in cultural heritage
without violating its sacred and identity value.
For some communities, cultural heritage has sacred value,
and using disruptive technologies such as AI to enjoy this
heritage could be a form of heresy. To respond to this risk, it
becomes necessary to introduce an additional domain-speciﬁc
ethical principle: dignity, i.e., the need to ensure the respectful
preservation of culturally sensitive material, such as material
of sacred, identity signiﬁcance, and its intrinsically human
nature [9]. For this reason, it is desirable to engage in an open
dialogue with the communities that live the cultural heritage
to represent it in a manner consistent with their customs and
traditions.


TIRIBELLI et al.: ETHICS OF AI FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
301
G. Responsibility Attribution for Actions and Decisions
Based on AI Outcomes
According to the EU guidelines, explainability is another
essential principle and condition for trustworthy AI [8]. The
need for explainable AI is associated with the risk of a
black box effect. Indeed, the better AI performs, the more
difﬁcult it is to explain the solutions provided by such models.
However, since cultural heritage is a common good and
an expression of the values of the relevant community, the
solutions and decisions on cultural heritage obtained by AI
models should be explainable to defend AI-based results
with a rational explanation that non-technical users, including
audiences and communities, can understand. For example, AI
can signiﬁcantly support restoration practices, reconstructing
missing parts of frescoes or old damaged buildings. However,
if one cannot explain why the AI arrived at that solution, it
is difﬁcult to assess if that solution is ﬂawed or trustworthy.
Most importantly, if that decision proves to be incorrect, it
would become hard to determine who is responsible for the
resulting consequences and changes on the cultural heritage.
The complexity arises from the involvement of multiple actors
in AI systems, including system designers, software producers,
and relevant data providers. Moreover, assigning responsibility
is further complicated by AI systems’ ability to autonomously
modify themselves (self-adapt) based on the processing of new
data or their continuous interaction with their environment.
This lack of accountability risks damaging invaluable cultural
assets and undermines public trust in AI applications within
this sensitive ﬁeld.
For this reason, explainability is a key pro-ethical condition
for assessing and distributing responsibility. Indeed, one of the
most signiﬁcant ethical challenges is the need for an under-
standing of who is responsible for decisions made based on
the results processed by AI systems. Assigning responsibility
for decisions based on results derived by AI systems is a
highly debated topic in several areas of AI application, such as
healthcare and justice. However, the use of AI in the cultural
sector still needs to be better considered. Regardless of the
extent to which AI is used in cultural heritage preservation
practice, it is essential to clarify who bears responsibility for
decisions based on algorithms’ results, predominantly when
those decisions cause harm or lead to adverse or incorrect
outcomes. It is essential to deﬁne whether the algorithms can
be considered, to some extent, agents or whether the respon-
sibility for their decisions lies only with individuals such
as developers, computer scientists, or end users such as art
historians and archaeologists [52]. Given the risks listed above
and knowing that AI systems, as well as human intelligence
can fail, it is vital to recognize those responsibilities when
such threats occur working on this issue ex ante. Speciﬁcally,
determining who is responsible for situations such as the
misreading or misinterpretation of a work of art, the failure
of a sensor to monitor the deterioration of cultural heritage
resulting in its damage, or the incorrect cataloging of a work
of art, is crucial for a reliable and trustworthy use of AI in
cultural heritage. In addition, decisions based on AI algorithms
can also result in economic injuries to buyers and sellers in the
art market, such as in the case of misattribution of the work.
The issue of allocating responsibility is also strictly linked
to the new challenge in AI-generated contexts of attributing
authorship for art images and products especially in cases of
copyright infringements. For example, the question of who can
be held responsible for copyright infringement of a work used
by the AI system as a training image to create the AI-generated
creative content must be clariﬁed by design. We expand this
challenge in the next section.
H. A New Concept of Authorship
Further concerns to consider are today widely related to
the so-called rise of Generative AI which makes it possible
to create realistic art products such as poetic texts, melodies,
or paintings [2]. As previously outlined Generative AI pro-
duces creative content using training data from existing art
media [35]. Despite the opportunities Generative AI can bring
to art and creativity we outlined above, it also poses signiﬁcant
sector-speciﬁc issues related to the determination of authorship
such as the risk of copyright infringement and the challenge of
the creative industry to ensure fairness in the labor market [53].
Since generative AI produces creative results by training on
existing images often copyrighted and part of cultural heritage,
copyright infringement can frequently occur. In particular,
the ﬁnal outputs could be considered derivative works for
which the original artists could claim authorship, at least
jointly [53]. If, on the one hand, there is a risk of alleged
copyright infringement of the training images, there is also the
challenge of determining authorship of the new creative work
created by Generative AI. Therefore, the question arises about
who has the right of authorship to a creative output achieved
by generative AI. Indeed, text-to-image systems underlie the
creation of artistic images using generative AI. Tools such as
Midjourney, DALL-E, and SORA work effectively when the
prompts used are speciﬁc and well-written [54], [55]. This has
given rise to a new research area called “prompt engineering,”
where it is essential to determine the extent to which the right
of authorship rests with the prompt engineer, the AI system, or
its developers. The importance of establishing the authorship
of the work lies in the primary purpose of copyright law,
which is to promote creative production as a social practice to
support the dialogue between the viewer and the artist, who
has a political role in society [56]. From this aspect arises
the question of authenticity. Suppose only art that serves as a
medium for poetic dialogue between artist and viewer, that is,
between two human beings, is understood as authentic. In that
case, understanding the author of an AI-generated work with
which the viewer enters a dialogue is of utmost importance
to assess AI-generated artworks’ authenticity. Consequently,
resolving the work’s authorship dilemma is fundamental to
deﬁning its authenticity.
Finally, linked to this aspect, generative AI poses a sig-
niﬁcant challenge to the future of the cultural heritage labor
market [35]. Indeed, suppose authorship of AI-generated
works rests with a computer. In that case, this will bring the
risk of technological substitution not only for repetitive jobs


302
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2024
that follow explainable processes but also work requiring more
creativity or domain expertise. For this reason, these systems
have begun to worry professional groups such as composers,
designers, and writers who, until a few years ago, saw their
jobs at low risk of technological substitution because creativity
is a process that is traditionally human, to date not easily
codiﬁable in concrete rules [35].
Furthermore, those in the industry who cannot use these
tools due to a lack of technical skills will inevitably be unable
to beneﬁt from their opportunities. In this scenario, generative
AI challenges the role of humans as creative agents in soci-
ety [57], risking delegating to algorithms even the most human
of capabilities, namely creativity and invention. Consequently,
human creativity, imagination, and even divergence from AI
logic might be channeled and discouraged.
IV. CALL TO ACTION
While many ethical issues related to the use of AI in the
cultural heritage ﬁeld ﬁt within broader AI ethics frameworks,
challenges emerge in the cultural heritage ﬁeld that do not
precisely ﬁt within existing ethical frameworks. Aspects such
as authenticity, dignity, shared responsibility, and meaningful
participation are unique in their kind and speciﬁc application
of AI in the cultural context. Hence, our call to action is to
consider the risks and opportunities we discussed in order to
manifest the urgency of a sector-speciﬁc, actionable ethical
guidelines for using AI in cultural heritage.
Given the great amount of possibilities AI offers to cultural
sectors, it is necessary to promote its conscious development
while considering the risks and ethical challenges that its
application may entail in a ﬁeld, namely that of cultural
heritage, which until recently was the exclusive domain of
human beings.
Despite the signiﬁcant efforts of actors such as UNESCO
with its Recommendations on the Ethics of AI [7], these
guidelines provide only the high-level groundwork for deter-
mining the requirements that AI technologies should meet to
ensure their trustworthy use in the ﬁeld of cultural heritage.
Considering the speciﬁc ethical risks and sensitive issues
identiﬁed above for AI in cultural heritage, these guidelines
need to be further developed in a context-sensitive way to be
truly effective and actionable in this ﬁeld. This section will
contribute to pave the way in this direction by highlighting
the areas that need research and work to create a sector-
speciﬁc ethical and policy compass and regulation. For each
area of work, we deﬁne also the involved stakeholders. It is
worth outlining that a few of the pathways we propose are
more actionable in the near future (e.g., establishing criteria
for authenticity through consensus votis among experts and
stakeholders), while others require further time and effort due
to their complex nature (e.g., to deﬁne the authorship of AI-
generated works of art as it required knowledge of data input
and training of the systems that are often opaque).
First, the conditions under which AI technologies do not
compromise the authenticity of the artistic experience must be
identiﬁed. Furthermore, it is crucial to reformulate the concept
of artistic authenticity and the criteria for determining what is
authentic in light of the incursion of AI in cultural heritage.
Moreover, it is essential to deﬁne the criteria under which
digitization makes the artistic experience more accessible and
comprehensive while retaining the centrality of the physical
artwork. In other words, it is crucial to understand in which
conditions digital artistic experience can undermine cultural
heritage’s authenticity, leading to substituting the physical one.
To work on this aspect, the contribution of experts in the ﬁeld,
such as art historians, cultural mediators, and aesthetics, who
can deﬁne the boundaries within which the artistic experience
retains its authenticity, is essential.
Second, it is necessary to develop greater literacy regarding
AI and digitization processes [7] so that it does not remain the
exclusive preserve of a highly educated and elitist audience.
For this reason, it is essential to introduce digital and computer
science skills at all levels of education, from elementary
school to higher levels. Redesigning educational systems with
interdisciplinary capabilities offers the opportunity to combine
artistic skills with cutting-edge technological solutions. To
ensure the preservation of cultural heritage and encourage
innovation and creativity, a collaborative approach between AI
and professionals in the ﬁeld is necessary, rather than viewing
them as mutually exclusive. That would be possible through
education, the acquisition of innovative skills, and greater
awareness of how AI tools work. Only in this way AI can
become a beneﬁcial tool rather than a harmful substitute. Better
education and a greater understanding of how AI works will help
develop systems that foster creative human agency rather than
replace or undermine it. Working on these goals necessitates
the involvement of technologists and technical experts who
deﬁne the minimum requirements for the informed use of these
technologies to spread. Their involvement needs to arise from
national and international institutional actors (e.g., UNESCO
or Committee on Culture and Education (CULT)), deﬁning
new education policies based on an understanding of how
technologies work, which would ensure a more informed and
conscious use of them. Furthermore, AI systems must ensure
justice as fairness and nondiscrimination when applied to
cultural heritage. For this reason, in a living heritage context,
the needs and cultural values of the local community must
be respected and considered. Therefore, it is necessary to
develop workﬂows to implement digitization projects with a
bottom-up approach, starting from the needs of the population
stewarding cultural heritage. In other words, deﬁning criteria
for evaluating digitization actions based on a community-based
approach is essential. In line with the recommendations of
UNESCO, a multi-stakeholder approach must be adopted, to
ensure the centrality of the reference group [7]. In particular,
the cultural sector’s public, private, and nonproﬁt stakeholders
are called upon. This line of effort is undoubtedly the most
complex, requiring more signiﬁcant commitment. The needs
of the local community change depending on the area in
which it operates, so the deﬁnition of general reference
standards requires a noteworthy collective and collaborative
effort. Moreover, needs and preferences also change over time,
hence, ongoing monitoring and revision may also be needed.
Finally, further work needs to be done on the legal side.
According to EC Ethical Guidelines for a trustworthy AI, to be


TIRIBELLI et al.: ETHICS OF AI FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
303
deemed trustworthy, AI systems should meet the requirement
of accountability [8]. This means that, on the one hand, clear
regulations must be developed for algorithms’ accountability.
On the other hand, appropriate redress and compensation
mechanisms must be deﬁned in case of harm or dangerous
outcomes, for example, when a cultural heritage site is
damaged, mining the history and memory of a community,
when a misattribution of a work of art causes economic harm
to the owner or buyer, or in case of incorrect interpretation
or cataloging. In addition, an international copyright law
update that protects artists’ rights and their works from
copyright infringement by generative AI is particularly urgent.
Furthermore, it is necessary to clearly deﬁne whether AI-
generated creative works can be considered artistic expressions
and, if so, who owns their authorship. In this case, the scientiﬁc
community and governments are called upon to reﬂect and
develop new regulations and a uniﬁed perspective to provide
legal clarity on this issue.
V. CONCLUSION
This article attempted to shed light on the potential of
AI for the promotion and preservation of cultural heritage
considering the ethical implications that these applications
may have, such as the loss of authenticity of the artwork, the
attribution of responsibility for decisions based on the results
of algorithms, the risk of discrimination against minorities,
the implications related to universal access to cultural heritage
and, ﬁnally, the issue of authorship and the role of the artist in
our society. AI has proven to be able to enter every aspect of
our existence, and it is doing so in an increasingly rapid and
high-performance manner, making it difﬁcult for institutions to
respond promptly to the diversity of challenges that arise with
this technology. The importance of this work lies in its call
for institutions, the scientiﬁc community, and experts in the
ﬁeld to action for establishing speciﬁc criteria and standards
that go beyond the generalist approach of the guidelines that
have existed to date and develop clear and speciﬁc industry
guidelines for harnessing AI’s beneﬁts and preventing its risks
for cultural heritage, thereby promoting an informed use of
these technologies without jeopardizing the positive social
impact of art and culture. Aware that so much work needs
to be done in this direction, we hope our study will pave
the way for further multidisciplinary and multi-stakeholder
efforts, involving professionals from different sectors – from
art historians to archaeologists, from computer scientists to
jurists – in the ﬁeld of ethical AI for cultural heritage, as
far as necessary to improve a relational, mutually ﬂourishing
approach between AI agency and human agency and creativity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
All the authors have contributed to editing this paper. Views
and opinions expressed are however those of the authors only
and do not necessarily reﬂect those of the European Union
or the European Education and Culture Executive Agency
(EACEA). Neither the European Union nor EACEA can be
held responsible for them.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Felicetti, M. Paolanti, P. Zingaretti, R. Pierdicca, and E. S. Malinverni,
“Mo.Se.: Mosaic image segmentation based on deep cascading learn-
ing,” Virtual Archaeol. Rev., vol. 12, no. 24, pp. 25–38, Jan. 2021,
doi: 10.4995/var.2021.14179.
[2] S. Shahriar, “GAN computers generate arts? A survey on visual
arts, music, and literary text generation using generative adver-
sarial
network,”
Displays,
vol. 73,
Jul.
2022,
Art.
no.
102237,
doi: 10.1016/j.displa.2022.102237.
[3] W. Tabone, Technology for Cultural Heritage, Tesserae Spring Edition,
Heritage Malta, Kalkara, Malta, pp. 46–54, 2019.
[4] G. Boccardi, “From mitigation to adaptation: A new heritage paradigm
for the anthropocene,” in Perceptions of Sustainability in Heritage
Studies, Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter, 2015, pp. 87–98.
[5] K. Izsak, A. Terrier, S. Kreutzer, T. Strähle, C. Roche, and M. Moretto
(Publ. Ofﬁce Eur. Union, Luxembourg City, Luxembourg). Opportunities
and Challenges of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Technologies for the Cultural
and Creative Sectors, 2022, doi: 10.2759/144212.
[6] A. Jobin, M. Ienca, and E. Vayena, “The global landscape of AI ethics
guidelines,” Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 1, no. 9, pp. 389–399, 2019.
[7] “Recommendation on the ethics of artiﬁcial intelligence.” UNESCO.
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000381137
[8] (Publ. Ofﬁce Eur. Union, Luxembourg City, Luxembourg). Ethics
Guidelines for Trustworthy AI, 2019, doi: 10.2759/346720.
[9] S. Pansoni, S. Tiribelli, M. Paolanti, E. Frontoni, and B. Giovanola,
“Design
of
an
ethical
framework
for
artiﬁcial
intelligence
in
cultural
heritage,”
in
Proc.
IEEE
Int.
Symp.
Ethics
Eng.,
Sci.
Technol.
(ETHICS),
West
Lafayette,
IN,
USA,
2023,
pp. 1–5,
doi: 10.1109/ETHICS57328.2023.10155020.
[10] D. MacKay, “The United Nations Convention on the rights of persons
with disabilities,” Syracuse J. Int’l L. & Com., vol. 34, p. 323, 2006.
[11] S. Asakawa, J. Guerreiro, D. Ahmetovic, K. M. Kitani, and C. Asakawa,
“The present and future of museum accessibility for people with visual
impairments,” in Proc. 20th Int. ACM SIGACCESS Conf. Comput.
Accessibil., 2018, pp. 382–384, doi: 10.1145/3234695.3240997.
[12] F. Candlin, “Blindness, art and exclusion in museums and galleries,”
Int. J. Art Design Educ., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 100–110, Mar. 2003,
doi: 10.1111/1468-5949.00343.
[13] D. Ahmetovic, C. Bernareggi, K. Keller, and S. Mascetti, “MusA:
artwork accessibility through augmented reality for people with
low vision,” in Proc. 18th Int. Web All Conf., 2021, pp. 1–9,
doi: 10.1145/3430263.3452441.
[14] K. Sheehy, H. Garcia Carrizosa, J. Rix, J. Seale, and S. Hayhoe,
“Inclusive museums and augmented reality: Affordances, participation,
ethics, and fun,” Int. J. Inclusive Museum, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 67–85,
Jan. 2019, doi: 10.18848/1835-2014/CGP/v12i04/67-85.
[15] N.
Cherukuru,
R.
Manuel,
A.
J.
Lauer,
T.
Scheitlin,
and
B. Bhagchandani, “Using augmented reality (AR) to create immersive
and accessible museums for people with vision-impairments,” in Proc.
MuseWeb, 2021, pp. 1–23.
[16] N.
Dìaz-Rodrìguez
and
G.
Pisoni,
“Accessible
cultural
heritage
through explainable artiﬁcial intelligence,” in Proc. Adjunct Publ.
28th ACM Conf. User Model., Adapt. Pers., 2020, pp. 317–324,
doi: 10.1145/3386392.3399276.
[17] G. Kostoska, A. P. Vermeeren, J. Kort, and C. Gullstrom, “Video-
mediated participation in virtual museum tours for older adults,” in Proc.
10th Int. Conf. Design Emot., 2016, pp. 1–10.
[18] K. Shitut, J. Geigel, J. Decker, G. Jacobs, and A. Doherty, “Triggering
the past: Cultural heritage interpretation using augmented and virtual
reality at a living history museum,” in Proc. GHC, 2021, pp. 61–70,
doi: 10.2312/gch.20211406.
[19] S. Agostinelli, F. Battaglini, T. Catarci, F. Dal Falco, and A. Marrella,
“Generating personalized narrative experiences in interactive storytelling
through automated planning,” in Proc. 13th Biannu. Conf. Ital. Conf.
(SIGCHI CHITALY’19), 2019, pp. 23–25.
[20] A. Reshetnikov, “What AI can bring to glam? Experience of ‘saint
George on a bike’ project,” in Proc. Manuscript Papers Prepared
Workshop, 2022, pp. 1–12.
[21] D. Ocón, “Digitalising endangered cultural heritage in southeast asian
cities: Preserving or replacing?” Int. J. Heritage Stud., vol. 27, no. 10,
pp. 975–990, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1080/13527258.2021.1883711.
[22] K. Jacquot and R. Saleri, “Gathering, integration, and interpretation of
heterogeneous data for the virtual reconstruction of the Notre Dame de
Paris roof structure,” J. Cult. Herit., vol. 65, pp. 232–240, Jan. 2024.


304
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2024
[23] N. Van Noord, E. Hendriks, and E. Postma, “Toward discovery of
the artist’s style: Learning to recognize artists by their artworks,”
IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 46–54, Jul. 2015,
doi: 10.1109/MSP.2015.2406955.
[24] R. Rizk, D. Rizk, F. Rizk, and A. Kumar, “A hybrid capsule network-
based deep learning framework for deciphering ancient scripts with
scarce annotations: A case study on phoenician epigraphy,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst. (MWSCAS), Lansing, MI, USA,
2021, pp. 617–620, doi: 10.1109/MWSCAS47672.2021.9531798.
[25] J. Cao, Z. Zhang, A. Zhao, H. Cui, and Q. Zhang, “Ancient mural
restoration based on a modiﬁed generative adversarial network,” Herit.
Sci., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–14, Jan. 2020, doi: 10.1186/s40494-020-0355-x.
[26] R. Pierdicca and M. Paolanti, “Geoai: A review of artiﬁcial intelligence
approaches for the interpretation of complex geomatics data,” Geosci.
Instrum., Methods Data Syst., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 195–218, Jun. 2022,
doi: 10.5194/gi-11-195-2022.
[27] Ø. D. Trier, J. Reksten, and K. Løseth, “Automated mapping of cultural
heritage in Norway from airborne LiDAR data using faster R-CNN,”
Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 95, Mar. 2021, Art. no. 102241,
doi: 10.1016/j.jag.2020.102241.
[28] A. Argyrou and A. Agapiou, “A review of artiﬁcial intelligence and
remote sensing for archaeological research,” Remote Sens., vol. 14,
no. 23, p. 6000, Nov. 2022, doi: 10.3390/rs14236000.
[29] L. Espina-Romero and J. Guerrero-Alcedo, “Fields touched by digital-
ization: Analysis of scientiﬁc activity in scopus,” Sustainability, vol. 14,
no. 21, Nov. 2022, Art. no. 14425, doi: 10.3390/su142114425.
[30] X. Wang, “Artiﬁcial intelligence in the protection and inheritance
of cultural landscape heritage in traditional village,” Sci. Program.,
vol. 2022, pp. 1–11, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1155/2022/9117981.
[31] M. Mishra, T. Barman, and G. V. Ramana, “Artiﬁcial intelligence-based
visual inspection system for structural health monitoring of cultural
heritage,” J. Civil Struct. Health Monit., vol. 14, pp. 103–120, Jan. 2024,
doi: 10.1007/s13349-022-00643-8.
[32] F.
Granata
and
F.
Di
Nunno,
“Artiﬁcial
intelligence
models
for prediction of the tide level in Venice,” Stochastic Environ.
Res.
Risk
Assess.,
vol. 35,
no. 12,
pp. 2537–2548,
Apr.2021,
doi: 10.1007/s00477-021-02018-9.
[33] G. Fangi, W. Wahbeh, E. S. Malinverni, F. Di Stefano, and R. Pierdicca,
“Archaeological syrian heritage memory safeguard by low cost geo-
matics techniques,” in Proc. IMEKO Int. Conf. Metrol. Archaeol. Cult.
Herit., Lecce, Italy, 2017, pp. 23–25.
[34] D.
Abate
et
al.,
“Signiﬁcance.
Stop
illicit
heritage
trafﬁcking
with
artiﬁcial
intelligence,”
Int.
Archives
Photogram.
Remote
Sens.
Spatial
Inf.
Sci.,
vol. 43,
pp. 729–736,
May
2022,
doi: 10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B2-2022-729-2022.
[35] Z.
Epstein
et
al.,
“Art
and
the
science
of
generative
AI,”
Science,
vol. 380,
no. 6650,
pp. 1110–1111,
Jun.
2023,
doi: 10.1126/science.adh4451.
[36] “ICOM Code of Ethics for Museums—As approved by the 21st
general assembly of ICOM in Seoul, Republic of South Korea, 8
October 2004,” Int. J. Cult. Property, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 393–408, 2006,
doi: 10.1017/S094073910606022X.
[37] E. Nakonieczna and J. Szczepa´nski, “Authenticity of cultural heritage
vis-à-vis heritage reproducibility and intangibility: From conservation
philosophy to practice,” Int. J. Cult. Policy, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 220–237,
2023.
[38] U. S. Malik, L. N. Tissen, and A. P. Vermeeren, “3D reproduc-
tions of cultural heritage artefacts: Evaluation of signiﬁcance and
experience,” Stud. Digit. Herit., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–29, Jun. 2021,
doi: 10.14434/sdh.v5i1.32323.
[39] Z. Manzuch, “Ethical issues in digitization of cultural heritage,”
J.
Contemp.
Archival
Stud.,
vol. 4,
no. 2,
p.
4,
Jan.
2014,
doi: 10.2788/8472.
[40] D. Goldblatt, B. L. Brown, and S. Patridge, “The work of art in the age
of mechanical reproduction,” in Aesthetics: A Reader in Philosophy of
the Arts, 4th ed., England, U.K.: Routledge, 2017, pp. 66–79.
[41] E. Ch’Ng, Y. Li, S. Cai, and F.-T. Leow, “The effects of VR envi-
ronments on the acceptance, experience, and expectations of cultural
heritage learning,” J. Comput. Cult. Herit., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1–21,
Feb. 2020, doi: 10.1145/3352933.
[42] S. Sontag, “Against interpretation,” in Against Interpretation and Other
Essays. New York, NY, USA: Macmillan, 2001.
[43] A. Gupta and N. Kapoor, “Comprehensiveness of archives: A modern
ai-enabled approach to build comprehensive shared cultural heritage,”
2020, arXiv.2008.04541.
[44] A. Maas, F. Rottensteiner, and C. Heipke, “Classiﬁcation under
label noise based on outdated maps,” Annal. Photogram., Remote
Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 215–222, May 2017,
doi: 10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-1-W1-215-2017.
[45] H.
Whaanga
et
al.,
“He
Matapihi
M¯a
Mua,
M¯o
Muri:
The
ethics, processes, and procedures associated with the digitization
of
indigenous
knowledge—The
Pei
Jones
collection,”
Catalog.
Classif.
Quart.,
vol. 53,
nos. 5-6,
pp. 520–547,
Jan.
2015,
doi: 10.1080/01639374.2015.1009670.
[46] S. Mhlambi and S. Tiribelli, “Decolonizing ai ethics: Relational auton-
omy as a means to counter ai harms,” Topoi, vol. 42, pp. 1–14, Jul. 2023,
doi: 10.1007/s11245-022-09874-2.
[47] L. Squires (Univ. Washington Inf. School, Seattle, WA, USA).
Beyond Bias: Ethics & AI in Cultural Heritage, 2021. Accessed:
Sep. 16, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://ischool.uw.edu/capstone/
projects/2021/beyond-bias-ethics-ai-cultural-heritage
[48] G. Cima, M. Console, M. Lenzerini, and A. Poggi, “A review of
data abstraction,” Front. Artif. Intell., vol. 6, pp. 1–14, Jun. 2023,
doi: 10.3389/frai.2023.1085754.
[49] A. Tzouganatou, “Openness and privacy in born-digital archives:
Reﬂecting the role of AI development,” AI Soc., vol. 37, no. 3,
pp. 991–999, 2022.
[50] M. Gea, X. Alaman, P. Rodriguez, and V. Martinez, “Towards smart
& inclusive society: Building 3D immersive museum by children with
cognitive disabilities,” in Proc. EDULEARN16, 2016, pp. 5260–5268,
doi: 10.21125/edulearn.2016.2240.
[51] J. Taylor and L. K. Gibson, “Digitisation, digital interaction and social
media: Embedded barriers to democratic heritage,” Int. J. Herit. Stud.,
vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 408–420, 2017.
[52] J. Huggett, “Algorithmic agency and autonomy in archaeological
practice,” Open Archaeol., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 417–434, Jun. 2021,
doi: 10.1515/opar-2020-0136.
[53] P. Mezei, “From leonardo to the next rembrandt–the need for AI
pessimism in the age of algorithms,” UFITA, vol.84, no. 2, pp. 390–429.
Jul. 2020, doi: 10.5771/2568-9185-2020-2-390.
[54] S. Flynn, “Wipo conversation on intellectual property (IP) and artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI),” Am. Univ. Washington College Law, Washington, DC,
USA, Working Paper, 2020.
[55] J. Oppenlaender, “A taxonomy of prompt modiﬁers for text-to-image
generation,” Behav. Inf. Technol., 2023, to be published.
[56] C. J. Craig. “The AI-copyright challenge: Tech-neutrality, authorship,
and the public interest.” SSRN.com. Jan. 2022. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4014811
[57] A. Lavazza and M. Farina, “Infosphere, dataﬁcation, and decision-
making processes in the AI era,” Topoi, vol. 42, pp. 843–856, Apr. 2023,
doi: 10.1007/s11245-023-09919-0.
Simona
Tiribelli
received the European Ph.D.
degree (cum laude) in global studies. justice, rights,
politics from the University of Macerata in 2021,
with a dissertation in ethics of artiﬁcial intelligence.
She is an Assistant Professor of Ethics with
the
University
of
Macerata,
Italy,
where
she
teaches
Ethics
of
Artiﬁcial
Intelligence
(AI),
Communication Ethics, and Global Justice and
Technology. She is a Key Person of the Jean
Monnet Chair in Ethics for Inclusive Digital Europe,
funded by the European Commission. She is also the
Director of AI Ethics with the Institute for Technology and Global Health,
the PathCheck Foundation’s Research and Innovation Center founded at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA. Previously, she held positions
as a Visiting Scholar of AI Ethics with the NYU Center for Bioethics,
New York University in 2023, and as a FULBRIGHT-Awarded Fellow with
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Lab in 2020. She is an
expert in the ﬁeld of applied ethics with a particular focus on digital ethics
and ethics of AI. She is also a Co-Founder of GAIA srl (AI Ethics and
Governance), innovative start-up and university spin off focused on the ethical-
legal assessment of AI solutions and AI Ethics advisor for companies in
Europe and U.S. On these topics, she authored two books and a signiﬁcant
number of articles in leading scientiﬁc journals (AI and Society, Science
and Engineering Ethics, and Ethics and Information Technology), and she
delivered more than 60 talks in academic institutions, such as Harvard
University, Tufts University, Toronto University, and many more in Europe,
Canada, and U.S.


TIRIBELLI et al.: ETHICS OF AI FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
305
Soﬁa Pansoni is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree
with
the
Department
of
Political
and
Communication Science and International relation-
ship, University of Macerata. She graduated in
Economics and Management for Arts, Culture,
Media, and Entertainment with a focus on art mar-
kets, heritage, and culture. She has always been
interested in multidisciplinary solutions that com-
bine management with technological innovation for
the promotion and economic sustainability of arts
and culture. During her professional experience, she
gave the opportunity to advocate for the digitization and promotion of
cultural heritage, collaborating with cultural and research institutions. During
these years, she has worked in the ﬁeld of digital marketing, analyzing
data, researching, and applying digital tools to improve the promotion and
communication of the creative and non-proﬁt industries.
Emanuele Frontoni is a Full Professor of Computer
Science with the University of Macerata and the Co-
Director of the VRAI Vision Robotics and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Lab. His research interests include
computer vision and artiﬁcial intelligence with appli-
cations in robotics, video analysis, human behavior
analysis, extended reality, and digital humanities,
with a speciﬁc focus on AI for cultural heritage.
He has published extensively on topics, such as
augmented reality, point cloud semantic segmenta-
tion, and the use of AI for the preservation and
interpretation of cultural assets. His work bridges advanced AI techniques
with practical applications in the cultural sector. He is also involved in several
national and international technology transfer projects in the ﬁelds of AI, deep
learning, data interoperability, cloud-based technologies, and big multimedia
data analysis, extended reality, and digital humanities.
Dr. Frontoni is a member of the European Association for Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, the European AI Alliance, and the International Association for
Pattern Recognition.
Benedetta Giovanola holds the Jean Monnet Chair
Ethics for inclusive digital Europe co-funded by
the European Union, and is a Full Professor of
Moral Philosophy with the University of Macerata,
Italy, where she has also been the deputy rector
and a vice-rector for international relations. She is
a regular Visiting Professor with Tufts University
and previously held visiting positions with UIBE,
Beijing, and KU Leuven, and was a Huygens Fellow
with Radboud University Nijmegen. She is the
Vice-President of the Italian Association of Moral
Philosophy and a Past Member of the Executive Board of the Italian
Association of Analytic Philosophy. She is an Expert of Digital Ethics and
Ethics of AI, as well as of the integration of EU values in digital technologies.
On these topics she is involved in a number or research and technology transfer
projects and serves as an ethics advisor for many international projects. She
is also the President and a Co-Founder of GAIA srl, an innovative start up
and university spin off focused on AI ethics and governance, and providing
training and assessment of AI systems ethical impact and legal compliance.
She has published seven books and more that 150 papers.
