The KuiSCIMA Dataset for Optical
Music Recognition of Ancient Chinese
Suzipu Notation
Tristan Repolusk(B)
and Eduardo Veas
Know-Center GmbH, Graz, Austria
{trepolusk,eveas}@know-center.at
Abstract. In recent years, the development of Optical Music Recogni-
tion (OMR) has progressed signiﬁcantly. However, music cultures with
smaller communities have only recently been considered in this process.
This results in a lack of adequate ground truth datasets needed for
the development and benchmarking of OMR systems. In this work, the
KuiSCIMA (Jiang Kui Score Images for Musicological Analysis) dataset
is introduced. KuiSCIMA is the ﬁrst machine-readable dataset of the
suzipu notations in Jiang Kui’s collection Baishidaoren Gequ from 1202.
Collected from ﬁve diﬀerent woodblock print editions, the dataset con-
tains 21797 manually annotated instances on 153 pages in total, from
which 14500 are text character annotations, and 7297 are suzipu nota-
tion symbols. The dataset comes with an open-source tool which allows
editing, visualizing, and exporting the contents of the dataset ﬁles. In
total, this contribution promotes the preservation and understanding of
cultural heritage through digitization.
Keywords: Ancient Chinese music · Optical Music Recognition ·
Suzipu · Banzipu · Jiang Kui
1
Introduction
Optical Music Recognition is a discipline belonging to document analysis. Its goal
is to automatically recognize symbolic musical data from documents provided as
image data. In recent years, its development has thrived, and many datasets for
OMR applications have been designed, the majority of which feature collections
of Western music. Even though there are some OMR algorithms which have been
created for Chinese music, publicly available OMR datasets are not available,
thus, comparing new algorithms against the state of the art is diﬃcult.
Therefore, in this paper the dataset KuiSCIMA (Jiang Kui Score Images for
Musicological Analysis) is presented. Not only is it the ﬁrst OMR dataset of
suzipu
notation, it is also the ﬁrst publicly available OMR dataset for
Chinese music. The dataset focuses on the 17 melodized ci
lyrics using suzipu
notation (also called banzipu
) from Jiang Kui’s collection Baishidaoren
The original version of this chapter was previously published without open access. A
correction to this chapter is available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-70552-6 27
c
⃝The Author(s) 2025, corrected publication 2025
E. H. Barney Smith et al. (Eds.): ICDAR 2024, LNCS 14809, pp. 38–54, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-70552-6_3


The KuiSCIMA Dataset for OMR of Ancient Chinese Music
39
Fig. 1. Here, the ﬁrst three notations of the piece Geximeiling
are visualized
for each edition, highlighting the diﬀerences in writing styles.
Gequ
, which was originally published in 1202. To ensure a variety
of writing styles in this rather small set of pieces, ﬁve diﬀerent woodblock print
editions have been included: The Lu edition from 1743 [24], the Zhang edition
from 1749 [25], the Siku Quanshu edition from the end of the 18th century [27],
the Zhu edition from 1913 [23], and the Shanghai MS (where MS is short for
manuscript) from around 1736 [26]. KuiSCIMA features symbol-level content
and position annotations for both text and notation characters together with
the binarized source images. A small sample of the editions is found in Fig. 1.
Baishidaoren Gequ has been chosen as the base for this dataset because
Jiang Kui (1155–1221) is one of the most inﬂuential poets of Song dynasty [10],
and his ci poems are held in high esteem. This literary genre originated as a
sung form of poetry, but became mostly literary over time [21]. The collection
Baishidaoren Gequ is therefore one of the earliest examples of melodized lyrics
in China and the largest historical collection of suzipu notation which have been
preserved until today [19]. In addition, a similar notation is used in the folk
music tradition of Xi’an Guyue
music, which is still practiced today
[6].
The KuiSCIMA dataset and the experiments in this paper promote the
preservation and understanding of cultural heritage through digitization.
2
Related Works
The related works to this paper can roughly be split into three groups: The ﬁrst
group encompasses digital ground truth OMR datasets, the second group deals
with the development of OMR algorithms, and the third group is datasets of
Chinese historical documents for OCR purposes.


40
T. Repolusk and E. Veas
The ﬁrst group encompasses many works, therefore, only three datasets are
chosen as representatives here: [7] contains the CVC-MUSCIMA1 dataset, which
consists of handwritten music scores and is speciﬁcally designed for score writer
identiﬁcation and staﬀremoval tasks. The MUSCIMA++ dataset [8] is based
on CVC-MUSCIMA and provides additional annotations for individual musical
symbols and the relationships between them. For Gregorian chants, there is
the GregoBase dataset [1] featuring the scores in GABC notation linked to the
original image sources.
In the second group, there is more cultural diversity than in the ﬁrst group.
For example, in [3], the authors develop a deep neural network for the transcrip-
tion of handwritten mensural notation. In [12], a holistic end-to-end approach for
mensural notation is developed, which is usable in settings where page content
annotations are given without speciﬁc symbol positions.
Targeting OMR for Chinese traditional music, two works are chosen as repre-
sentatives: [4] is a comparison of diﬀerent algorithms for recognition of gongche
notation of Kunqu musical theater, while [15] focuses on autonomous extraction
methods of jianzipu notation for the instrument guqin
. Unfortunately,
even though these are papers dealing with OMR methods for Chinese music
notations, they do not provide a publicly available ground truth dataset which
could be used for performance comparison of new OMR algorithms.
The third group contains databases such as the Tripitaka Koreana in Han
(TKH) and the Multiple Tripitaka in Han (MTH) datasets from [20], contain-
ing annotated character-level bounding boxes and text line annotations. These
have been expanded to the MTHv2 dataset in [11], containing 1081663 character
instances on 3199 pages in total. In [14], the ICDAR 2019 Historical Document
Reading Challenge on Large Structured Chinese Family Records dataset is intro-
duced with textline annotations on 12850 pages. The SCUT-CAB database [5]
contains detailed layout annotations of 4000 pages. KuiSCIMA however has a
much smaller dataset size, and only the portions containing the 17 suzipu pieces
are annotated with character-level segmentation boxes currently.
3
Methodology
3.1
Digital Representation Format
The format used for the representation is an extension of the JSON format 1.0
introduced in [13] and thus given the version number 2.0.
The ﬁle json schema suzipu.json2 is a JSON schema containing a technical
documentation of the digital representation format used in this paper, and it
can also be used to verify that a dataset ﬁle is of valid structure. In Fig. 2, the
structure of a suzipu piece is visualized.
1 The abbreviation MUSCIMA stands for MUsic SCore IMAges, being the inspiration
for the name of the KuiSCIMA dataset.
2 https://github.com/SuziAI/gui-tools/blob/main/json schema suzipu.json
(tagged
v2.0).


The KuiSCIMA Dataset for OMR of Ancient Chinese Music
41
Fig. 2. Structure of the suzipu piece format. Blue boxes mark required ﬁelds, and grey
boxes mark optional ﬁelds. (Color ﬁgure online)
For the metadata, in the root level, the following piece properties have
changed in version 2.0:
1. mode properties: Here, the properties uniquely deﬁning the mode are stored,
i.e., the l¨ul¨u
which is corresponding to melodic function gong
(stored
in gong lvlv), and the mode’s ﬁnal note (stored in final note). As opposed


42
T. Repolusk and E. Veas
to version 1.0, now the names of the 11 l¨ul¨u and of the 7 melodic functions
are given as uppercase pinyin string, as demonstrated in Fig. 2.
2. content: This is an ordered list of all the individual boxes in the piece. The
optional property notation content for storing the notation information has
changed. Instead of a plain string, it now consists of two subﬁelds pitch for
the pitch and secondary for the secondary suzipu symbol. The correspon-
dences between the notation and the ﬁeld representation are given in Table 1.
An introduction to the structure of the pieces of Baishidaoren Gequ and
further explanation on the format and ﬁeld choices are found in [13].
Table 1. The correspondence between the suzipu, its gongchepu name, and the JSON
ﬁeld representation.
3.2
Image Preprocessing
The 1743 Lu edition [24] and the Siku Quanshu edition [27] are available online
on the Chinese Text Project [16] and have been downloaded manually. The


The KuiSCIMA Dataset for OMR of Ancient Chinese Music
43
images are in PNG format, already binarized, and resized to a width of 800 pixel
and variable height. In the Siku Quanshu edition of the piece Nishangzhongxu
Diyi
, the ﬁrst four columns of the piece, which contain the title
and a part of the preface, show artifacts due to a suboptimal digitization of a
red stamp.
The other three editions must be preprocessed to be used for the dataset:
1. The 1913 Zhu edition [23] is scanned, each of the double-page images is split
into halves, rotated to ﬁt a rectangle frame if too skewed, cropped to the area
of the woodblock print, converted to grayscale, binarized using OpenCV-
Python’s implementation of Otsu’s method, resized to 800 pixels in width
using the cv2.INTER AREA ﬂag, and then binary thresholding with a threshold
of 235 is applied. Since there is still a lot of noise present, using OpenCV’s [2]
connectedComponentsWithStats function, all connected components with
an area of smaller or equal than 10 are removed.
2. For the Shanghai MS and the 1749 Zhang edition [25], a slightly diﬀerent
method is used: The individual pages are scanned, warped using the corrective
perspective tool in GIMP if too skewed, and cropped. Since the Zhang edition
contains remarks in black, yellow and red, the yellow and red ones are removed
before the grayscale conversion by extracting and replacing the colored parts
in HSV space. This color removal is not done for the Shanghai MS, since no
colored remarks are present. Then, the images are resized to 1600 pixels in
width, Otsu’s method is applied, and the images are individually split into
halves. The individual stages of preprocessing are illustrated in Fig. 3.
3.3
Annotation Process
Using the Suzipu Musical Notation Annotation Tool introduced in [13], for each
of the 17 ci pieces, the preprocessed pages containing the piece are selected. This
includes the title, possibly the mode information and the preface, and the lyrics
with the suzipu notation.
Then, using the HRCenterNet algorithm [18], for each page a segmentation
of the woodblock print is performed individually, yielding a set of rectangles,
each of which are supposed to correspond to the bounding box of a character
in the image. Using this preliminary segmentation, the boxes not belonging to
the piece are removed, and the boxes are checked individually and corrected
if necessary, so that each bounding box encompasses the character adequately.
Both text boxes and music boxes are created this way.
Additionally, the blank spaces in both the lyrics and music columns separat-
ing the stanzas are represented by a bounding box containing an empty string
as annotation, in order to encode the typographical layout of each edition as
closely as possible.


44
T. Repolusk and E. Veas
Fig. 3. Visualisation of the individual preprocessing steps for images of the Zhang
edition, as example the page containing Xinghuatianying
is chosen.


The KuiSCIMA Dataset for OMR of Ancient Chinese Music
45
In the next step, each box is assigned a label according to its function in the
document: E.g., boxes containing a character of the piece’s title are marked with
the Title label, the suzipu characters with the Music label etc.
After this, each box is annotated such that the annotation corresponds with
the semantic meaning of the character. In case of the text-based boxes, each
annotation is a string containing the ground truth of the Chinese character. In
case of the music-based boxes, each annotation is the digital representation of a
single suzipu character, i.e., a JSON object consisting of two ﬁelds pitch and
secondary, with values as described in Table 1.
Finally, the mode information is annotated and the piece is converted to the
JSON representation. As a ﬁnal step, all boxes in the dataset are resized so that
the segmentation box is minimal, i.e., the least amount of white space is present.
3.4
Annotation Remarks
There are three reasons why the ground truth annotations of both the Chinese
text characters and the suzipu notation symbols are not always clear:
1. All the editions in this dataset are results of woodblock printing, a process
involving manually carving out the shapes of each individual character. Sim-
ilar to modern prints, errors when copying the source material may occur,
and errors already included in the source material itself may be copied.
2. When printing, some parts of the woodblock may already be worn or the ink
is not distributed evenly, causing artifacts in the ﬁnal print [17].
3. Baishidaoren Gequ had been forgotten for over 300 years, before a manuscript
appeared in the beginning of the 18th century. All editions included in this
dataset thus have been copied from this manuscript in Qing dynasty, at a
time where the suzipu notation was already uncommon and ci poetry had
long turned from a musical practice into a mostly literary genre [21].
These factors may result in anomalous shapes or misprints of the text or the
suzipu notation characters, such that the meaning of certain musical symbols is
unclear and needs further interpretation. Some of these instances are common
to all or multiple editions in the KuiSCIMA dataset, while others are restricted
to individual editions.
The annotations in this dataset try to preserve the original shapes of the char-
acters as closely as possible, while still being interpreted in the suzipu framework
given in [13]. In case of seldom used Chinese characters, the most common vari-
ant character is used instead. For ambiguous Chinese characters, the character
is annotated as described in [21]. For unclear notation symbols, case-by-case
decisions had to be made which are listed in the ﬁle annotation remarks.pdf.3
3 https://github.com/SuziAI/KuiSCIMA/blob/main/annotation remarks.pdf
(tagged v1.0).


46
T. Repolusk and E. Veas
3.5
Dataset Contents
KuiSCIMA contains all 17 suzipu pieces from Baishidaoren Gequ in four diﬀerent
editions. The pieces are listed in Table 2.
Table 2. Listing of all the 17 pieces with suzipu notation. Column Index contains the
index with respect to the order of all pieces in Baishidaoren Gequ as given in [21].
Optical Symbolic Dataset. The optical symbolic dataset contains symbolic
text and notation information with bounding boxes annotating images of the his-
torical editions. This is the core of KuiSCIMA and the basis for the development
and evaluation of OMR methods acting on suzipu notation.
The folder KuiSCIMA/optical symbolic dataset contains all individual edi-
tions in folders named after the corresponding editions, i.e., 01 lu edition,
02 zhang edition, 03 siku quanshu edition, 04 zhu edition, and ﬁnally
05 shanghai manuscript. Inside each of these folders are two subfolders, one
for the images called images, and one for the JSON ﬁles called json.
The instances in the optical symbolic dataset feature a highly imbalanced
class distribution as visualized in Fig. 4. In addition, the task of identifying the
composite notations is diﬃcult, since the individual strokes of a symbol may
be separated or connected. As opposed to Chinese character OCR, any suzipu
symbol has at most two components. However, the degree of ambiguity in suzipu
is much higher due to the small set of components and their similarity to each
other. This ambiguity is shown in Fig. 5.


The KuiSCIMA Dataset for OMR of Ancient Chinese Music
47
Fig. 4. The balance of KuiSCIMA dataset. In (a), the total pitch distribution of all
instances is shown, while in (b), the distribution of the composite notations is illus-
trated.
Fig. 5. In each row, examples of similar-looking notations in the Shanghai MS are
visualized.
Symbolic Dataset. In addition, a purely symbolic dataset is provided, con-
taining two editions of the 17 pieces without image data annotations.


48
T. Repolusk and E. Veas
The edition of Wu Santu [22] is the basis for the symbolic-only dataset
regarding the notation and layout. The punctuation marks and the lyrics are
taken from Yang Yuanzheng’s new critical edition of Baishidaoren Gequ in [21].
This dataset follows the historical editions of Baishidaoren Gequ closely, includ-
ing pitch symbols which lie outside the pieces’ modes. It is found in the folder
KuiSCIMA/symbolic dataset/wu edition.
For certain applications such as music generation, it is beneﬁcial to normalize
the pitches such that only pitches which are in accordance with the pieces’ modes
are present in the data. This dataset, called normalized edition is provided in
the folder KuiSCIMA/symbolic dataset/normalized edition.
4
Baseline Experiments
Since the main goal of the KuiSCIMA dataset is the use for developing and
benchmarking suzipu OMR systems, a ﬁrst baseline on the task of symbol clas-
siﬁcation shall be established in this section. The source code is open-source and
publicly available.4
In this case, symbol classiﬁcation means the process of predicting the correct
symbol ground truth given its bounding box. Therefore, using the dataset extrac-
tor script5, the image patches are extracted and stored as individual images with
a JSON ﬁle describing their annotations.
4.1
Model Architecture and Preprocessing Data
The KuiSCIMA dataset contains 7297 annotated notation instances, from which
133 are excluded from training due to anomalous shapes, as described in Sect. 3.4.
Of these, 5168 are simple symbols (meaning that no secondary property is
present), and 1996 are composite symbols. Since the dataset is fairly small,
the convolutional neural network FashionCNN which is taken from [9] is used. It
takes input images of size 28 × 28.
Regarding preprocessing, each of the image instances is ﬁrst cleaned up by
removing small connected areas which might be printing artifacts. This is done
by extracting the contours using OpenCV’s [2] findContours function with
attributes cv2.RETR EXTERNAL and cv2.CHAIN APPROX NONE. Areas which have
a contourArea smaller than 1 are removed. Afterwards, the image is cropped
such that white space on the borders is removed.
For training images, additional image augmentations are used. Erosion and
dilution are applied with a probability of 10% each, and the image is shrunk such
that the longest side is uniformly distributed between 15 and 22, and the aspect
ratio is multiplied with a uniformly distributed factor between 0.6 and 1.5. The
4 https://github.com/SuziAI/SuziOMR/tree/main/baseline (tagged v1.0).
5 The dataset extraction procedure is described in https://github.com/SuziAI/
gui-tools/blob/main/readme ﬁles/README ANNOTATION TOOL.md#extract-
omr-dataset-from-corpus (tagged v2.0).


The KuiSCIMA Dataset for OMR of Ancient Chinese Music
49
Fig. 6. These data augmentations are used for training the model. The ﬁrst column
contains the image as directly exported from the dataset, and the other column contain
some random samples of augmentations of the image in the ﬁrst column.
Fig. 7. Here, the transformation of the validation and test data is seen. The ﬁrst
row contains the image as exported from the dataset, the second row contains the
corresponding transformation, and the third row contains the annotation.
image is randomly extended by white space to ﬁt into a 28 × 28 square, salt-
and-pepper noise is applied, it is inverted to have black background and white
foreground, random rotation between -8 and 8 degrees is applied, and the image
is normalized with the test dataset mean of 0.7102 and standard deviation of
0.0914. The training data augmentations are visualized in Fig. 6. The validation
and test images are shrunk such that the longest side has 20 pixels, extended to
a square and normalized as described before. This can be seen in Fig. 7.
Each of the pitch and secondary property are predicted using separate
instances of FashionCNN, with 11 output parameters for pitch, and 7 for sec-
ondary (i.e., none resp. the 6 secondary properties present in suzipu).


50
T. Repolusk and E. Veas
Due to the high label imbalance in the dataset, the training data is aug-
mented to 60000 samples with uniform label frequency. The validation data is
also sampled uniformly, but with preservation of the original dataset length.
4.2
Model Selection
A special selection procedure is applied. First, ﬁve diﬀerent model classes are
introduced. Each model class consists of a separate model for each pitch and
secondary property prediction. They diﬀer in what data is used for training and
for validation. The ﬁve model classes are:
– The All-20% model is trained on 80% of the KuiSCIMA dataset, while 20%
are used as a validation set.
– The Lu model is validated on the Lu edition instances, and trained on every
other model. Similarly, the Zhang, Siku, Zhu models are validated on the
Zhang edition, the Siku Quanshu edition, respectively the Zhu edition. Each
of those model classes is trained on all data except the validation data and
except the Shanghai MS, since it acts as a test set for the model evaluation.
For each of the ﬁve model classes, ﬁve training trials are made as a random
sample of the stochastic training process. In each trial, the model is trained with
at most 15 epochs of 600 batches with 100 images each, and the optimizer Adam
with a learning rate of 0.001 is used. For each trial, the model with the highest
accuracy on the validation set is saved. In Fig. 8 (a), the mean trial accuracies
and 95% conﬁdence intervals are shown for each model class. In (b), the best trial
is tested on the Shanghai MS, consisting of 1440 annotated notation symbols.
4.3
Interpretation
The results show signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the validation set accuracies for each
model class. It must again be emphasized that the training and validation stages
are performed on uniformly sampled datasets, which is not expected in real-world
pieces. The Lu pitch model yields the highest validation accuracy of about 95%,
while the Siku secondary model yields 93% on their respective validation sets.
From this and the results about variability in [12], one can conclude that both
the Lu and Siku Quanshu editions do not introduce as much data variability each
as the Zhang and Zhu datasets, since high accuracy values are achieved despite
dataset exclusion in training and vice versa.
When evaluating on the test data, all models perform with accuracies over
93% on pitch and over 88% on secondary. The Zhu pitch model with 95% and the
Siku secondary model with 94% accuracy perform best. This indicates a high
generalization of the models to unseen realistically-distributed data scenarios.
When combining a pitch model and a secondary model together, a mixed
model emerges which can predict the complete label of an instance. As a ﬁrst
metric for the suzipu notation in the KuiSCIMA dataset, the single CER for the
extracted characters is used. The results are found in Fig. 9, and it can be seen
that the model performing best is indeed the mixed model from the Zhu pitch
and the Siku secondary classiﬁer with a CER of 10.4%.


The KuiSCIMA Dataset for OMR of Ancient Chinese Music
51
Fig. 8. Validation and test set accuracies for each model class
Fig. 9. Here, the single CER are visualized for all mixed models.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, KuiSCIMA, the ﬁrst machine-readable digital OMR dataset con-
taining ancient Chinese suzipu notation is introduced. It is publicly available6
and based on ﬁve diﬀerent inﬂuential editions of Jiang Kui’s 17 suzipu pieces in
the famous collection Baishidaoren Gequ. The JSON format employed in this
dataset is semantically close to the original notation and features symbol-level
annotations of the textual and musical contents with their positions.
KuiSCIMA allows for training and benchmarking OMR models for symbol
segmentation and recognition. It is accompanied by an open-source toolbox7
6 https://github.com/SuziAI/KuiSCIMA (tagged v1.0).
7 https://github.com/SuziAI/gui-tools (tagged v2.0).


52
T. Repolusk and E. Veas
which allows for the creation and modiﬁcation of dataset ﬁles, supporting the
export MusicXML transnotations. It is able to extract the annotated individual
symbol images for direct OMR usage, as demonstrated in baseline experiments
on the task of symbol classiﬁcation for suzipu notation in Sect. 4.
The structure and contents of the KuiSCIMA dataset allow for musicological
uses, e.g., the computer-aided comparison of the diﬀerent editions, music analysis
based on n-grams, and other statistics-based methods.
In the future, we propose new research based on KuiSCIMA as follows:
– The re-encoding of KuiSCIMA into a standard notation format like the Music
Encoding Initiative (MEI8).
– The digitization of other suzipu-based music, e.g., Xi’an Guyue
.
– Generalizing KuiSCIMA to incorporate all pieces of Baishidaoren Gequ into
the dataset, including ten l¨ul¨upu and the jianzipu piece Guyuan
.
– The development of end-to-end OMR systems for suzipu notation.
Disclosure of Interests. The authors have no competing interests to declare that
are relevant to the content of this article.
References
1. Berten, O.: GregoBase: A database of Gregorian scores (2013). https://gregobase.
selapa.net
2. Bradski, G.: The OpenCV library. Dr. Dobb’s J. Softw. Tools (2000)
3. Calvo-Zaragoza, J., Toselli, A.H., Vidal, E.: Handwritten music recognition for
mensural notation with convolutional recurrent neural networks. Pattern Recogn.
Lett. 128 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2019.08.021
4. Chen, G.-F., Sheu, J.-S.: An optical music recognition system for traditional Chi-
nese Kunqu Opera scores written in Gong-Che Notation. EURASIP J. Audio
Speech Music Process. pp. 7–17. https://doi.org/10.1186/1687-4722-2014-7
5. Cheng, H., et al.: SCUT-CAB: a new benchmark dataset of ancient chinese books
with complex layouts for document layout analysis, November 2022, pp. 436–451.
ISBN 978-3-031-21647-3. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-21648-0 30
6. Cheng, Y.: Xi’an Guyue Xi’an old music in new China. ‘Living fossil’ or ‘ﬂowing
river’? Dissertation. School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London
(2005). https://eprints.soas.ac.uk/29336/1/10731431.pdf. Accessed 03 Aug 2023
7. Forn´es, A., et al.: CVC-MUSCIMA: a ground-truth of handwritten music score
images for writer identiﬁcation and staﬀremoval. Int. J. Doc. Anal. Recogn. 15(3),
243–251 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10032-011-0168-2.
8. Haji Jr., J., Pecina, P.: The MUSCIMA++ dataset for handwritten optical music
recognition. In: 14th International Conference on Document Analysis and Recog-
nition. ICDAR 2017, Kyoto, Japan, pp. 39–46 (2017)
9. Joshi, P.: Fashion mNIST with Pytorch (93% accuracy) (2019). https://www.
kaggle.com/code/pankajj/fashion-mnist-with-pytorch-93-accuracy. Accessed 10
Feb 2024
8 http://www.music-encoding.org.


The KuiSCIMA Dataset for OMR of Ancient Chinese Music
53
10. Lam, J.S.C.: Ci songs from the song dynasty: a M´enage `a Trois of lyrics, music, and
performance. New Liter. Hist. 46(4), 623–646. (2015). ISSN 00286087, 1080661X.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/24772762. Accessed 2 Aug 2023
11. Ma, W., et al.: Joint layout analysis, character detection and recognition for his-
torical document digitization. In: 2020 17th International Conference on Frontiers
in Handwriting Recognition (ICFHR), pp. 31– 36 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICFHR2020.2020.00017
12. Martinez-Sevilla, J.C., et al.: On the performance of optical music recognition in the
absence of speciﬁc training data. In: Proceedings of the 24th International Society
for Music Information Retrieval Conference (Milan, Italy). ISMIR, November 2023,
pp. 319–326 (2023). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10265289
13. Repolusk, T., Veas, E.: The Suzipu musical annotation tool for the creation of
machine-readable datasets of ancient Chinese music. In: Calvo-Zaragoza, J., Pacha,
A., Shatri, E. (eds.) Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Read-
ing Music Systems, Milan, Italy, pp. 7–11 (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2311.04091. https://sites.google.com/view/worms2023/proceedings
14. Saini, R., et al.: ICDAR 2019 historical document reading challenge on large struc-
tured chinese family records. In: 2019 International Conference on Document Anal-
ysis and Recognition (ICDAR), pp. 1499–1504 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICDAR.2019.00241
15. Shen, T., et al.: Semantic recognition of common musical notes in Guqin score
based on optimal statistical features. In: 4th International Conference on Advances
in Computer Technology, Information Science and Communications (CTISC), pp.
1–4 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/CTISC54888.2022.9849792
16. Sturgeon, D.: Chinese Text Project (2011). https://ctext.org/library.pl. Accessed
30 June 2023
17. Sturgeon, D.: Large-scale optical character recognition of pre-modern Chinese
texts. Int. J. Buddhist Thought Cult. 28(2), 11–44 (2018)
18. Tang, C.-W., Liu, C.-L., Chiu, P.-S.: HRCenterNet: an anchorless approach to Chi-
nese character segmentation in historical documents. In: 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 1924–1930 (2020)
19. West, A.C.: Musical notation for ﬂute in Tangut manuscripts. In: Popova, I. (ed.)
Tanguty v Central’noj Azii, pp. 443–454. Vostonaja literatura, Moskva (2012)
20. Yang, H., et al.: Dense and tight detection of Chinese characters in historical
documents: datasets and a recognition guided detector. IEEE Access 6, 30174–
30183 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2840218
21. Yang, Y.: Plum blossom on the far side of the stream. The renaissance of Jiang
Kui’s Lyric Oeuvre with facsimiles and a new critical edition of the songs of the
Whitestone Daoist. Hong Kong University Press, Hong Kong (2019)
22. Wu, S.
. Songci Yinyue Zhuanti Yanjiu
. Dissertation.
Yangzhou University (2013)
23. Kui, J.
: Baishidaoren Gequ
. (Ed. by, Zumou, Z.)
.
Guian: Zhushi (1913)
24. Kui, J.,
. Baishidaoren Gequ
. (Ed. by, Lu, Z.)
. reprinted
in [16], [1743] (2011). https://ctext.org/library.pl?if=en&res=775747. Accessed 30
June 2023
25. Kui, J.
. Baishidaoren Gequ
. (Ed. by, Zhang, Y)
.
reprinted in [21], pp. 259–323, [1749] (2019)


54
T. Repolusk and E. Veas
26. Kui, J.
. Baishidaoren Gequ
. (Ed. by, Lu, Z.
, Min, H.
, Wang, Z.
) reprinted in [21], pp. 193–254, [c.1736] (2019)
27. Kui J.,
. Baishidaoren Gequ
. In: Siku Quanshu
,
vol. 1. reprinted in [16]. https://ctext.org/library.pl?res=106386. Accessed 30 June
2023
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium
or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were
made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
